For other uses, see Doctor Faustus.
The Tragical History of the Life and Death of Doctor FaustusFrontispiece to printing of Doctor Faustus showing Faustus conjuring Mephistophilis.
The spelling "Histoy" is agreed to be typographical error.
Original languageEarly Modern EnglishGenreTragedySetting century Europe
The Tragical History of the Life and Death of Doctor Faustus, commonly referred to simply as Doctor Faustus, is an Elizabethan tragedy by Christopher Marlowe, based on German stories about the title character Faust.
It was written sometime between and and might have been performed between and Marlowe death in .
Two different versions of the play were published in the Jacobean era, several years later.
The powerful effect of early productions of the play is indicated by the legends that quickly accrued around them—that actual devils once appeared on the stage during performance, "to the great amazement of both the actors and spectators", sight that was said to have driven some spectators mad.
The Admiral Men performed Doctor Faustus times in the three years between October and October .
On November the diary of Philip Henslowe recorded £ payment to Samuel Rowley and William Bird for additions to the play, which suggests revival soon after that date.
The powerful effect of the early productions is indicated by the legends that quickly accrued around them.
In Histriomastix, his polemic against the drama, William Prynne records the tale that actual devils once appeared on the stage during performance of Faustus, "to the great amazement of both the actors and spectators".
Some people were allegedly driven mad, "distracted with that fearful sight".
John Aubrey recorded related legend, that Edward Alleyn, lead actor of The Admiral Men, devoted his later years to charitable endeavours, like the founding of Dulwich College, in direct response to this incident.
The play may have been entered into the Stationers' Register on December though the records are confused and appear to indicate conflict over the rights to the play.
A subsequent Stationers' Register entry, dated January assigns the play to the bookseller Thomas Bushnell, the publisher of the first edition.
Bushnell transferred his rights to the play to John Wright on September .
Two versions of the play exist:
The quarto, printed by Valentine Simmes for Thomas Law; this is usually called the text.
The title page attributes the play to "Ch.
A second edition (A) of first version was printed by George Eld for John Wright in .
It is merely direct reprint of the text.
The text is short for an English Renaissance play, only lines long.
The quarto, published by John Wright, the enlarged and altered text; usually called the text.
This second text was reprinted in and as late as .
Additions and alterations were made by the minor playwright and actor Samuel Rowley and by William Borne (or Birde), and possibly by Marlowe himself.
The version was once believed to be closer to the play as originally performed in Marlowe lifetime, simply because it was older.
By the after influential studies by Leo Kirschbaum the version came to be regarded as an abbreviation and the version as Marlowe original fuller version.
Kirschbaum and Greg considered the A text "bad quarto", and thought that the B text was linked to Marlowe himself.
Since then scholarship has swung the other way, most scholars now considering the A text more authoritative, even if "abbreviated and corrupt", according to Charles Nicholl.
The version omits lines but adds new lines, making it roughly one third longer than the version.
Among the lines shared by both versions, there are some small but significant changes in wording; for example, "Never too late, if Faustus can repent" in the text becomes "Never too late, if Faustus will repent" in the text, change that offers very different possibility for Faustus hope and repentance.
Another difference between texts and is the name of the devil summoned by Faustus.
Text states the name is generally "Mephistopheles", while the version of text commonly states "Mephostophilis".
The name of the devil is in each case reference to Mephistopheles in Faustbuch, the source work, which appeared in English translation in about .
The relationship between the texts is uncertain and many modern editions print both.
As an Elizabethan playwright, Marlowe had nothing to do with the publication and had no control over the play in performance, so it was possible for scenes to be dropped or shortened, or for new scenes to be added, so that the resulting publications may be modified versions of the original script.
In the past, it was assumed that the comic scenes were additions by other writers.
However, most scholars today consider the comic interludes an integral part of the play, regardless of their author, and so they continue to be included in print.
Their tone shows the change in Faustus ambitions, suggesting Marlowe did at least oversee the composition of them.
The clown is seen as the archetype for comic relief.
Doctor Faustus is based on an older tale; it is believed to be the first dramatization of the Faust legend.
believe that Marlowe developed the story from popular translation, commonly called The English Faust Book.
German edition of the Historia von D. Johann Fausten, which itself may have been influenced by even earlier, equally ill preserved pamphlets in Latin (such as those that likely inspired Jacob Bidermann treatment of the damnation of the doctor of Paris, Cenodoxus ).
Several soothsayers or necromancers of the late fifteenth century adopted the name Faustus, reference to the Latin for "favored" or "auspicious"; typical was Georgius Faustus Helmstetensis, calling himself astrologer and chiromancer, who was expelled from the town of Ingolstadt for such practices.
Subsequent commentators have identified this individual as the prototypical Faustus of the legend.
Whatever the inspiration, the development of Marlowe play is very faithful to the Faust Book, especially in the way it mixes comedy with tragedy.
However, Marlowe also introduced some changes to make it more original.
Faustus soliloquy, in Act on the vanity of human science
The substitution of Pageant of Devils for the seven deadly sins
He also emphasised Faustus' intellectual aspirations and curiosity, and minimised the vices in the character, to lend Renaissance aura to the story.
The play is in blank verse and prose in thirteen scenes or twenty scenes .
Blank verse is largely reserved for the main scenes while prose is used in the comic scenes.
Modern texts divide the play into five acts; act being the shortest.
As in many Elizabethan plays, there is chorus (which functions as narrator), that does not interact with the other characters but rather provides an introduction and conclusion to the play and, at the beginning of some Acts, introduces events that have unfolded.
Along with its history and language style, scholars have critiqued and analysed the structure of the play.
Leonard H. Frey wrote document entitled In the Opening and Close of Doctor Faustus, which mainly focuses on Faustus opening and closing soliloquies.
He stresses the importance of the soliloquies in the play, saying: "the soliloquy, perhaps more than any other dramatic device, involved the audience in an imaginative concern with the happenings on stage".
By having Doctor Faustus deliver these soliloquies at the beginning and end of the play, the focus is drawn to his inner thoughts and feelings about succumbing to the devil.
The soliloquies also have parallel concepts.
In the introductory soliloquy, Faustus begins by pondering the fate of his life and what he wants his career to be.
He ends his soliloquy with the solution and decision to give his soul to the devil.
Similarly in the closing soliloquy, Faustus begins pondering, and finally comes to terms with the fate he created for himself.
Frey also explains: "The whole pattern of this final soliloquy is thus grim parody of the opening one, where decision is reached after, not prior to, the survey".
Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.
Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This section possibly contains original research.
Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations.
Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.
May (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article needs attention from an expert in Literature.
The specific problem is: this plot summary contains many errors.
Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In the prologue, The Chorus introduces the reader to Faustus and his story.
He is described as being "base of stock"; however, his intelligence and scholarship eventually earns him the degree of Doctor at the University of Wittenburg.
During this opening, the reader also gets first clue to the source of Faustus downfall.
Faustus tale is likened to that of Icarus, who flew too close to the sun and fell to his death when the sun melted his waxen wings.
This is hint to Faustus end as well as bringing to the reader attention the idea of hubris (excessive pride), which is represented in the Icarus story and ultimately Faustus'.
Faustus comments that he has mastered every subject he has studied.
He depreciates Logic as merely being tool for arguing; Medicine as being unvalued unless it allowed raising the dead and immortality; Law as being mercenary and beneath him; and Divinity as useless because he feels that all humans commit sin, and thus to have sins punishable by death complicates the logic of Divinity.
He dismisses it as "What doctrine call you this?
Que sera, sera" (What will be, shall be).
Faustus instructs his servant Wagner to summon Valdes and Cornelius, famous witchcrafter and famous magician, respectively.
Two angels, called the Good Angel and the Bad Angel, appear to Faustus and dispense their own perspectives of his interest in magic and necromancy.
Though Faustus seems momentarily dissuaded, he is apparently won over by the Bad Angel, proclaiming, "How am glutted with conceit of this" ("conceit" meaning the possibilities magic offers to him).
Valdes and Cornnelius declare that if Faustus devotes himself to magic, great things are indeed possible with someone of Faustus' learning and intelligence.
Faustus' absence is noted by two scholars who are less accomplished than Faustus himself.
They request that Wagner reveal Faustus' present location, request which Wagner at first haughtily denies, then bombastically reveals.
The two scholars worry about Faustus being corrupted by the art of Magic and leave to inform the rector of the university.
That night, Faustus begins his attempt to summon devil in the presence of Lucifer and other devils (although Faustus is unaware of their presence).
After he creates magic circle and speaks an incantation through which he revokes his baptism, demon (a representative of the devil himself) named Mephistophilis appears before him, but Faustus is unable to tolerate the hideous looks of the demon and commands it to change its appearance.
Faustus, seeing the obedience of the demon in changing its form, takes pride in his skill.
He tries to bind the demon to his service, but is unable to because Mephistophilis already serves Lucifer, who is also called the Prince of Devils.
Mephistophilis also reveals that it was not Faustus' power that summoned him but rather his abjuration of scriptures that results in the Devil coming in the hope of claiming Faustus' soul.
Mephistophilis introduces the history of Lucifer and the other devils while indirectly telling Faustus that Hell has no circumference nor limit and is more of state of mind than physical location.
Faustus' inquiries into the nature of hell lead to Mephistophilis saying: "Oh, Faustus, leave these frivolous demands, which strikes terror to my fainting soul".
Using Mephistophilis as messenger, Faustus strikes deal with Lucifer: he is to be allotted years of life on Earth, during which time he will have Mephistophilis as his personal servant and the ability to use magic; however, at the end he will give his body and soul over to Lucifer as payment and spend the rest of time as one damned to Hell.
This deal is to be sealed in the form of contract written in Faustus' own blood.
After cutting his arm, the wound is divinely healed and the Latin words Homo, fuge!
Despite the dramatic nature of this divine intervention, Faustus disregards the inscription with the assertion that he is already damned by his actions thus far and therefore left with no place to which he could flee.
Mephistophilis brings coals to break the wound open again, and thus Faustus is able to take his oath written in his own blood.
Faustus begins by asking Mephistophilis series of science related questions.
However, the demon seems to be quite evasive and finishes with Latin phrase, Per inoequalem motum respect totes ("through unequal motion with respect to the whole thing").
This sentence has not the slightest scientific value, thus giving the impression that Mephistophilis is untrustworthy.
Faustus then asks who made the world, question which Mephistophilis refuses to answer (Mephistophilis knows that God made the world).
When Faustus announces his intention to renounce magic and repent, Mephistophilis storms away.
The good and evil angels return to Faustus: the Good Angel urges him to repent and recant his oath to Lucifer, but the Evil Angel sneers that Faustus will never repent.
This is the largest fault of Faustus throughout the play: he is blind to his own salvation and remains set on his soul damnation.
Lucifer, accompanied by Beelzebub and Mephistophilis, appears to Faustus and frightens him into obedience to their pact.
Lucifer then, as an entertainment, brings to Faustus the personification of the seven deadly sins.
Faustus fails to see them as warnings and ignores their implication.
From this point until the end of the play, although he gains great fame for his powers, Dr. Faustus does nothing worthwhile, having begun his pact with the attitude that he would be able to do anything.
Instead, he merely uses his temporary powers for practical jokes and frivolous demonstrations to the nobility.
Finally, with his allotted years mostly expired and realizing that he has given up his soul for no good reason, Faustus appears to scholars and warns them that he is damned and will not be long on the Earth.
He gives speech about how he is damned and eventually seems to repent for his deeds.
At the end of the play, on the eleventh hour, Mephistophilis comes to collect Faustus' soul and Faustus is dragged off the stage to Hell by Mephistophilis and other devils even though Dr. Faustus tries to repent and beg for mercy from those devils.
In the later 'B text' of the play, there is subsequent scene where the three scholars discover his remains strewn about the stage: they state that Faustus was damned, one scholar declaring that the devils have torn him asunder, but they determine, because of Faustus' learning, to have him properly buried and mourned.
Faustus says himself in the text 'What are thou, Faustus, but man condemned to die'
This section possibly contains original research.
Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations.
Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.
March (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The theological implications of Doctor Faustus have been the subject of considerable debate throughout the last century.
Among the most complicated points of contention is whether the play supports or challenges the Calvinist doctrine of absolute predestination, which dominated the lectures and writings of many English scholars in the latter half of the sixteenth century.
According to Calvin, predestination meant that God, acting of his own free will, elects some people to be saved and others to be damned—thus, the individual has no control over his own ultimate fate.
This doctrine was the source of great controversy because it was seen by the so called anti Calvinists to limit man free will in regard to faith and salvation, and to present dilemma in terms of theodicy.
At the time Doctor Faustus was performed, this doctrine was on the rise in England, and under the direction of Puritan theologians at Cambridge and Oxford had come to be considered the orthodox position of the Church of England.
Nevertheless, it remained the source of vigorous and, at times, heated debate between Calvinist scholars, such as William Whitaker and William Perkins, and anti Calvinists, such as William Barrett and Peter Baro.
The dispute between these Cambridge intellectuals had quite nearly reached its zenith by the time Marlowe was student there in the and likely would have influenced him deeply, as it did many of his fellow students.
Concerning the fate of Faustus, the Calvinist concludes that his damnation was inevitable.
His rejection of God and subsequent inability to repent are taken as evidence that he never really belonged to the elect, but rather had been predestined from the very beginning for reprobation.
In his Chiefe Points of Christian Religion, Theodore Beza, the successor to John Calvin, describes the category of sinner into which Faustus would most likely have been cast:
To conclude, they which are most miserable of all, those climb degree higher, that their fall might be more grievous: for they are raised so high by some gift of grace, that they are little moved with some taste of the heavenly gift: so that for the time they seem to have received the seed...But this is plain, that the spirit of adoption, which we have said to be only proper unto them which are never cast forth, but are written in the secret of God people, is never communicated to them, for were they of the elect they should remain still with the elect.
All these therefore (because of necessity, and yet willingly, as they which are under the slavery of sin, return to their vomit, and fall away from faith) are plucked up by the roots, to be cast into the fire.
For the Calvinist, Faustus represents the worst kind of sinner, having tasted the heavenly gift and rejected it.
His damnation is justified and deserved because he was never truly adopted among the elect.
According to this view, the play demonstrates Calvin "three tiered concept of causation," in which the damnation of Faustus is first willed by God, then by Satan, and finally, by himself.
As Calvin himself explains it in his Institutes of Christian Religion:
We see therefore that it is no absurdity, that one self act be ascribed to God, to Satan, and to man: but the diversity in the end and manner of doing, causeth that therein appeareth the justice of God to be without fault, and also the wickedness of Satan and man, bewrayeth itself to their reproach.
The anti Calvinist view, however, finds such thinking repugnant, and prefers to interpret Doctor Faustus as criticism of such doctrines.
One of the greatest critics of Calvinism in Marlowe day was Peter Baro, who argued that such teachings fostered despair among believers, rather than repentance among sinners.
He claimed, in fact, that Calvinism created theodical dilemma:
That this question so long debated of the Philosophers, most wise men, and yet undetermined, cannot even of Divines, and men endued with heavenly wisdom, be discussed and decided?
And that God hath in this case laid crosse upon learned men, wherein they might perpetually torment themselves?
Baro recognised the threat of despair which faced the Protestant church if it did not come to an agreement of how to understand the fundamentals.
For him, the Calvinists were overcomplicating the issues of faith and repentance, and thereby causing great and unnecessary confusion among struggling believers.
Faustus himself confesses similar sentiment regarding predestination:
The reward of sin is death."
If we say that we have no sin,
We deceive ourselves, and there no truth in us."
Why then belike we must sin,
Ay, we must die an everlasting death.
Faustus includes well known speech addressed to the summoned shade of Helen of Troy, in Act V, scene I.
The following is from the Gutenberg project e text of the quarto (with footnotes removed).
Was this the face that launch'd thousand ships,
And burnt the topless towers of Ilium
Sweet Helen, make me immortal with kiss.
Her lips suck forth my soul: see, where it flies!
Come, Helen, come, give me my soul again.
Here will dwell, for heaven is in these lips,
And all is dross that is not Helena.
I will be Paris, and for love of thee,
Instead of Troy, shall Wertenberg be sack'd;
And will combat with weak Menelaus,
And wear thy colours on my plumed crest;
Yea, will wound Achilles in the heel,
And then return to Helen for kiss.
O, thou art fairer than the evening air
Clad in the beauty of thousand stars;
Brighter art thou than flaming Jupiter
When he appear'd to hapless Semele;
More lovely than the monarch of the sky
And none but thou shalt be my paramour!
Another well known passage comes after Faustus asks Mephistophilis how he (Mephistophilis) is out of Hell, to which Mephistophilis replies:
Why this is hell, nor am out of it.
Thinkt thou that I, who saw the face of God,
And tasted the eternal joys of heaven,
Am not tormented with ten thousand hells
In being deprived of everlasting bliss?
Ravished" by magic Faustus turns to the dark arts when law, logic, science, and theology fail to satisfy him.
According to Charles Nicholl this places the play firmly in the Elizabethan period when the problem of magic ("liberation or damnation?")
was matter of debate, and when Renaissance occultism aimed at furthering of science.
Nicholl, who connects Faustus as "studious artisan" to the "hands on experience" promoted by Paracelsus, sees in the former follower of the latter, "magician as technologist".
Mephistophilis is demon whom Faustus conjures up while first using magic.
Readers initially feel sympathy for the demon when he attempts to explain to Faustus the consequences of abjuring God and Heaven.
Mephistophilis gives Faustus description of Hell and the continuous horrors it possesses; he wants Faustus to know what he is getting himself into before going through with the bargain:
Think’st thou that who saw the face of God
And tasted the eternal joy of heaven
Am not tormented with ten thousand hells
In being deprived of everlasting bliss?
O Faustus, leave these frivolous demands
Which strikes terror to my fainting soul!
However, Faustus believes that supernatural powers are worth lifetime in Hell:
Say he (Faustus) surrender up to him (Lucifer) his soul
So he will spare him four and twenty years,
Letting him live in all voluptuousness
Having thee (Mephistophilis) ever to attend on me (Marlowe )
argue that Mephistophilis depicts the sorrow that comes with separation from God.
Mephistophilis is foreshadowing the pain Faustus would have to endure, should he go through with his plan.
In this facet, Faustus can be likened to Icarus, whose insatiable ambition was the source of his misery and the cause of his plight.
The first television adaptation was broadcast in by the BBC starring David King Wood as Faustus and Hugh Griffith as Mephistopheles.
In another BBC television version starred William Squire as Faustus in an adaptation by Ronald Eyre intended for schools.
In the BBC adapted the play for television as two episode production starring Alan Dobie as Faustus; this production was also meant for use in schools.
The play was adapted for the screen in by Richard Burton and Nevill Coghill, who based the film on an Oxford University Dramatic Society production in which Burton starred opposite Elizabeth Taylor as Helen of Troy.
On December BBC Radio broadcast an adaptation of the play with Stephen Moore as Faustus, Philip Voss as Mephistopheles and Maurice Denham as the Old Man.
A second adaptation was broadcast on BBC Radio on September this time with Paterson Joseph as Faustus, Ray Fearon as Mephistopheles, Toby Jones as Wagner, Janet McTeer as the Evil Angel and Anton Lesser as the Emperor.
Two live performances in London have been videotaped and released on DVD: one at the Greenwich Theatre in and one at the Globe Theatre in starring Paul Hilton as Faustus and Arthur Darvill as Mephistopheles.
Doctor Faustus has raised much controversy due to its alleged interaction with the demonic realm.
Before Marlowe, there were few authors who ventured into this kind of writing.
After his play, other authors began to expand on their views of the spiritual world.
Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris, line from the play commonly translated as "misery loves company"
CLASSIC POETRY for Christopher Marlowe Deathday: The Survival of "Doctor Faustus"".
Logan, Terence P.; Denzell S. Smith, eds.
The Predecessors of Shakespeare: Survey and Bibliography of Recent Studies in English Renaissance Drama.
Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
No Elizabethan play outside the Shakespeare canon has raised more controversy than Doctor Faustus.
There is no agreement concerning the nature of the text and the date of composition... and the centrality of the Faust legend in the history of Western world precludes any definitive agreement on the interpretation of the play...
Faustus' and the Politics of Magic".
Doctor Faustus the text (A text ed.).
The History and Practice of Magic.
The name has many forms: Marlowe writes Mephistophilis...
The English Faust Book, critical edition.
A Short History of the Theatre.
Playing with desire: Christopher Marlowe and the art of tantalization.
In Heffernan, William C.; Kleinig, John (eds.).
Leo Ruickbie, Faustus: The Life and Times of Renaissance Magician (The History Press, p.
The History of the damnable life, and deserved death of Doctor Iohn Faustus by P.F., Gent,
The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus: Critical Edition of the Version.
The necessity of tragedy: How what goethe played with is still entirely relevant."
Retrieved from https://www.emptymirrorbooks.com/literature/the necessity of tragedy how what goethe played with is still entirely relevant
a Frey, Leonard H. (December ).
Antithetical Balance in the Opening and Close of Doctor Faustus".
Religious Controversies of the Elizabethan Age: Survey of Printed Sources.
Marlowe Cambridge Years and the Writing of Doctor Faustus".
SEL: Studies in English Literature –.
A Brief Declaration of the Chief Points of Christian Religion Set Forth in Table."
The Persecutory Imagination: English Puritanism and the Literature of Religious Despair.
The Institution of the Christian Religion: In Four Books.
Glasgow: John Bryce, Archibald McLean, Alexander Irvine.
A Special Treatise of God Providence With an Appendix by Peter Baro."
Marlowe 'Doctor Fausus' as an Inverted Saint Life".
Casting Doubt in Marlowe 'Doctor Faustus'".
SEL: Studies in English Literature –.
