For the characters, see Victor Frankenstein and Frankenstein monster.
Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus is novel written by English author Mary Shelley that tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, young scientist who creates hideous, sapient creature in an unorthodox scientific experiment.
Shelley started writing the story when she was and the first edition of the novel was published anonymously in London on January when she was .
Her name first appeared on the second edition, published in .
Shelley travelled through Europe in journeying along the river Rhine in Germany with stop in Gernsheim, which is kilometres mi) away from Frankenstein Castle, where, two centuries before, an alchemist was engaged in experiments.
Later, she travelled in the region of Geneva (Switzerland)—where much of the story takes place—and the topic of galvanism and occult ideas were themes of conversation among her companions, particularly her lover and future husband, Percy B. Shelley.
Mary, Percy and Lord Byron decided to have competition to see who could write the best horror story.
After thinking for days, Shelley dreamt about scientist who created life and was horrified by what he had made; her dream later evolved into the novel story.
Frankenstein is infused with elements of the Gothic novel and the Romantic movement.
At the same time, it is an early example of science fiction.
Brian Aldiss has argued that it should be considered the first true science fiction story because, in contrast to previous stories with fantastical elements resembling those of later science fiction, the central character "makes deliberate decision" and "turns to modern experiments in the laboratory" to achieve fantastic results.
It has had considerable influence in literature and popular culture and spawned complete genre of horror stories, films and plays.
Since the novel publication, the name "Frankenstein" has often been used to refer to the monster itself.
This usage is considered erroneous, but some commentators regard it as well established and acceptable.
In the novel, Frankenstein creation is identified by words such as "creature", "monster", "daemon", "wretch", "abortion", "fiend" and "it".
Speaking to Victor Frankenstein, the monster says "I ought to be thy Adam, but am rather the fallen angel" (which ties to Lucifer in Paradise Lost, which the monster reads, and which relates to the disobedience of Prometheus in the book subtitle).
Frankenstein is written in the form of frame story that starts with Captain Robert Walton writing letters to his sister.
It takes place at an unspecified time in the century, as the letters' dates are given as "—".
In the story following the letters by Walton, the readers find that Victor Frankenstein creates monster that brings tragedy to his life.
The novel Frankenstein is written in epistolary form, documenting fictional correspondence between Captain Robert Walton and his sister, Margaret Walton Saville.
Walton is failed writer and captain who sets out to explore the North Pole and expand his scientific knowledge in hopes of achieving fame.
During the voyage, the crew spots dog sled driven by gigantic figure.
A few hours later, the crew rescues nearly frozen and emaciated man named Victor Frankenstein.
Frankenstein has been in pursuit of the gigantic man observed by Walton crew.
Frankenstein starts to recover from his exertion; he sees in Walton the same obsession that has destroyed him, and recounts story of his life miseries to Walton as warning.
The recounted story serves as the frame for Frankenstein narrative.
Victor begins by telling of his childhood.
Born in Naples, Italy, into wealthy Genevan family, Victor and his brothers, Ernest and William, all three being sons of Alphonse Frankenstein by the former Caroline Beaufort, are encouraged to seek greater understanding of the world through chemistry.
As young boy, Victor is obsessed with studying outdated theories that focus on simulating natural wonders.
When Victor is five years old, his parents adopt Elizabeth Lavenza, the orphaned daughter of an expropriated Italian nobleman, with whom Victor (allegedly) later falls in love.
During this period, Victor parents, Alphonse and Caroline, take in yet another orphan, Justine Moritz, who becomes William nanny.
Weeks before he leaves for the University of Ingolstadt in Germany, his mother dies of scarlet fever; Victor buries himself in his experiments to deal with the grief.
At the university, he excels at chemistry and other sciences, soon developing secret technique to impart life to non living matter.
Eventually, he undertakes the creation of humanoid, but due to the difficulty in replicating the minute parts of the human body, Victor makes the Creature tall, about feet m) in height and proportionally large.
Despite Victor selecting its features as beautiful, upon animation the creature is instead hideous, with watery white eyes and yellow skin that barely conceals the muscles and blood vessels underneath.
Repulsed by his work, Victor flees when it awakens.
While wandering the streets, he meets his childhood friend, Henry Clerval, and takes Henry back to his apartment, fearful of Henry reaction if he sees the monster.
Victor falls ill from the experience and is nursed back to health by Henry.
After four month recovery, he receives letter from his father notifying him of the murder of his brother William.
Upon arriving in Geneva, Victor sees the Creature near the crime scene and climbing mountain, leading him to believe his creation is responsible.
Justine Moritz, William nanny, is convicted of the crime after William locket, which had contained miniature portrait of Caroline, is found in her pocket.
Victor is helpless to stop her from being hanged, as he knows no one would believe his story.
Ravaged by grief and guilt, Victor retreats into the mountains.
The Creature finds him and pleads for Victor to hear his tale.
Intelligent and articulate, the Creature relates his first days of life, living alone in the wilderness and finding that people were afraid of and hated him due to his appearance, which led him to fear and hide from them.
While living in an abandoned structure connected to cottage, he grew fond of the poor family living there, and discreetly collected firewood for them.
Secretly living among the family for months, the Creature learned to speak by listening to them and he taught himself to read after discovering lost satchel of books in the woods.
When he saw his reflection in pool, he realized his physical appearance was hideous, and it terrified him as it terrifies normal humans.
Nevertheless, he approached the family in hopes of becoming their friend.
Initially he was able to befriend the blind father figure of the family, but the rest of them were frightened and they all fled their home, resulting in the Creature leaving, disappointed.
He traveled to Victor family estate using details from Victor journal, murdered William, and framed Justine.
The Creature demands that Victor create female companion like himself.
He argues that as living being, he has right to happiness.
The Creature promises that he and his mate will vanish into the South American wilderness, never to reappear, if Victor grants his request.
Should Victor refuse his request, The Creature also threatens to kill Victor remaining friends and loved ones and not stop until he completely ruins him.
Fearing for his family, Victor reluctantly agrees.
The Creature says he will watch over Victor progress.
Clerval accompanies him to England, but they separate at Victor insistence at Perth, Scotland.
Victor suspects that the Creature is following him.
Working on the female creature on the Orkney Islands, he is plagued by premonitions of disaster, such as the female hating the Creature or becoming more evil than him, but more particularly the two creatures might lead to the breeding of race that could plague mankind.
He tears apart the unfinished female creature after he sees the Creature, who had indeed followed Victor, watching through window.
The Creature later confronts and tries to threaten Victor into working again, but Victor is convinced that the Creature is evil and that its mate would be evil as well, and the pair would threaten all humanity.
Victor destroys his work and the Creature vows that he will "be with wedding night".
Victor interprets this as threat upon his life, believing that the Creature will kill him after he finally becomes happy.
When Victor lands in Ireland, he is soon imprisoned for Clerval murder, as the Creature had strangled Clerval to death and left the corpse to be found where his creator had arrived, causing the latter to suffer another mental breakdown in prison.
After being acquitted, Victor returns home with his father, who has restored to Elizabeth some of her father fortune.
In Geneva, Victor is about to marry Elizabeth and prepares to fight the Creature to the death, arming himself with pistols and dagger.
The night following their wedding, Victor asks Elizabeth to stay in her room while he looks for "the fiend".
While Victor searches the house and grounds, the Creature strangles Elizabeth to death.
From the window, Victor sees the Creature, who tauntingly points at Elizabeth corpse; Victor tries to shoot him, but the Creature escapes.
After Victor gets back to Geneva, Victor father, weakened by age and by the death of his precious Elizabeth, dies few days later.
Seeking revenge, Victor pursues the Creature to the North Pole, but collapses from exhaustion and hypothermia before he can find his quarry.
At the end of Victor narrative, Captain Walton resumes the telling of the story, closing the frame around Victor recounting.
A few days after the Creature vanished, the ship becomes trapped in pack ice and multiple crewmen die in the cold, before the rest of Walton crew insists on returning south once it is freed.
Upon hearing the crew pleas to their captain, Victor, angered, lectures them with powerful speech: it is hardship, not comfort and easiness, that defines glorious undertaking such as theirs; he urges them to be men, not cowards.
The ship is freed and Walton, owing it to the will of his men, albeit regretfully, decides to return South.
Victor, even though in very weak condition, states that he will go on by himself.
Victor dies shortly thereafter, telling Walton, with his last words, to seek "happiness in tranquillity and avoid ambition".
Walton discovers the Creature on his ship, mourning over Victor body.
The Creature tells Walton that Victor death has not brought him peace; rather, his crimes have left him completely alone.
The Creature vows to kill himself so that no others will ever know of his existence.
Walton watches as the Creature drifts away on an ice raft that is soon "lost in darkness and distance", never to be seen again.
Mary Shelley had tragic life from the beginning.
Shelley mother, Mary Wollstonecraft, died from infection shortly after giving birth to her.
Shelley grew close attachment to her father having never known her mother.
Her father, William Godwin, hired nurse briefly to care for her and her half sister before he ended up remarrying.
Shelley stepmother did not like the close bond she had with her father, which caused friction and Godwin to then favor his other two daughters and sons.
Her father was famous author of the time and her education was of great importance, though not formal.
Shelley grew up surrounded by her father friends, writers and persons of political importance, that gathered often at the family home.
This inspired her authorship at an early age.
Shelley met Percy Bysshe Shelley, who later became her husband, at the age of sixteen while he was visiting with her father.
Godwin did not agree with the relationship of his daughter to an older, married but separated man, so they fled to France along with her stepsister, Claire Clairmont.
Later, Shelley gave birth and lost their first child.
Over eight years she would endure similar pattern of pregnancy and loss, one hemorrhaging occurring until Percy placed her upon ice to cease the bleeding.
Mary and Percy trip with Claire to visit her lover Lord Byron, in Geneva during the summer of began the friendship amongst the two couples in which Byron suggested they have competition of writing the best ghost story.
Historians suggest an affair occurred too, even that paternity of one Shelley child may have been Byron.
Mary was eighteen years old when she won the contest with her creation of Frankenstein.
Shelley was heavily influenced by both of her parents' works.
Her father was famous for Enquiry Concerning Political Justice and her mother famous for Vindication of the Rights of Woman.
Her father novels also influenced her writing of Frankenstein.
These novels included Things as They Are; or, The Adventures of Caleb Williams, St. Leon, and Fleetwood.
All of these books were set in Switzerland, similar to the setting in Frankenstein.
Some major themes of social affections and the renewal of life that appear in Shelley novel stem from these works she had in her possession.
Other literary influences that appear in Frankenstein are Pygmalion et Galatée by Mme de Genlis and Ovid with the use of an individual lacking intelligence and those individuals identifying the problems with society.
Ovid also inspires the use of Prometheus in Shelley title.
Percy and Byron discussion on life and death surrounded many scientific geniuses of the time.
They discussed ideas from Erasmus Darwin and the experiments from Luigi Galvani.
Mary joined these conversations and the ideas of Darwin and Galvani were both present in her novel.
The horrors of not being able to write story for the contest and her hard life also influenced the themes within Frankenstein.
The themes of loss, guilt, and the consequences of defying nature present in the novel all developed from Mary Shelley own life.
The loss of her mother, the relationship with her father, and the death of her first child created the monster and his separation from parental guidance.
In issue of The Journal of Religion and Health psychologist proposed guilt stemmed from her not feeling good enough for Percy because of the loss of their child.
Victor Frankenstein Protagonist and narrator of most of the story.
The creature (Frankenstein monster) The hideous creature created by Victor Frankenstein.
Mrs. Margaret Saville Resident of England.
Addressee of letters written by him.
Captain Robert Walton Captain of the boat which picked up Victor.
Brother of Mrs. Margaret Saville, and writer of letters addressed to her.
One of the most intimate friends of Victor father.
Caroline Beaufort Beaufort daughter, Victor mother.
Henry Clerval Victor best friend from childhood.
The son of merchant of Geneva.
Justine Moritz Daughter of Madame Moritz.
Moved in with the Frankenstein family at age of and hanged for the murder of William.
Elizabeth Lavenza Daughter of Milanese nobleman.
Her mother was German and had died on giving birth to her.
Raised as Victor “cousin” in the Frankenstein home.
M. Krempe professor of natural philosophy at university of Ingolstadt.
He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of his science.
M. Waldman A professor, at Ingolstadt.
De Lacey Blind old man descended from good family in France.
His family was observed by the monster, and unbeknownst to them, taught him to speak and read.
Safie Daughter of Turkish Merchant and Christian Arab.
Daniel Nugent A witness against Victor in his murder trial.
Draft of Frankenstein ("It was on dreary night of November that beheld my man completed ...")
During the rainy summer of the "Year Without Summer", the world was locked in long cold volcanic winter caused by the eruption of Mount Tambora in .
Mary Shelley, aged and her lover (and later husband) Percy Bysshe Shelley visited Lord Byron at the Villa Diodati by Lake Geneva in Switzerland.
The weather was consistently too cold and dreary that summer to enjoy the outdoor holiday activities they had planned, so the group retired indoors until dawn.
Sitting around log fire at Byron villa, the company amused themselves by reading German ghost stories translated into French from the book Fantasmagoriana, then Byron proposed that they "each write ghost story".
Unable to think of story, young Mary became anxious: "Have you thought of story?
I was asked each morning, and each morning was forced to reply with mortifying negative.
During one evening in the middle of summer, the discussions turned to the nature of the principle of life.
Perhaps corpse would be re animated", Mary noted, "galvanism had given token of such things".
It was after midnight before they retired, and unable to sleep, she became possessed by her imagination as she beheld the "grim terrors" of her "waking dream".
I saw the pale student of unhallowed arts kneeling beside the thing he had put together.
I saw the hideous phantasm of man stretched out, and then, on the working of some powerful engine, show signs of life, and stir with an uneasy, half vital motion.
Frightful must it be; for supremely frightful would be the effect of any human endeavour to mock the stupendous mechanism of the Creator of the world.
In September astronomer Donald Olson, after visit to the Lake Geneva villa the previous year and inspecting data about the motion of the moon and stars, concluded that her "waking dream" took place "between a.m. and a.m." on June several days after the initial idea by Lord Byron that they each write ghost story.
She began writing what she assumed would be short story.
With Percy Shelley encouragement, she expanded the tale into full fledged novel.
She later described that summer in Switzerland as the moment "when first stepped out from childhood into life".
Shelley wrote the first four chapters in the weeks following the suicide of her half sister Fanny.
This was one of many personal tragedies that impacted Shelley work.
Shelley first child died in infancy, and when she began composing Frankenstein in she was likely nursing her second child, who would also be dead at Frankenstein publication.
Byron managed to write just fragment based on the vampire legends he heard while travelling the Balkans, and from this John Polidori created The Vampyre the progenitor of the romantic vampire literary genre.
Thus two seminal horror tales originated from the conclave.
The group talked about Enlightenment and Counter Enlightenment ideas as well.
Shelley believed the Enlightenment idea that society could progress and grow if political leaders used their powers responsibly; however, she also believed the Romantic ideal that misused power could destroy society (Bennett –).
Shelley wrote much of the book while residing in lodging house in the centre of Bath in .
Shelley manuscripts for the first three volume edition in (written as well as the fair copy for her publisher, are now housed in the Bodleian Library in Oxford.
The Bodleian acquired the papers in and they belong now to the Abinger Collection.
In the Bodleian published new edition of Frankenstein, edited by Charles E. Robinson, that contains comparisons of Mary Shelley original text with Percy Shelley additions and interventions alongside.
Mary Shelley by Richard Rothwell (–)
Shelley completed her writing in April/May and Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus was published on January by the small London publishing house Lackington, Hughes, Harding, Mavor, Jones.
It was issued anonymously, with preface written for Mary by Percy Bysshe Shelley and with dedication to philosopher William Godwin, her father.
It was published in an edition of just copies in three volumes, the standard "triple decker" format for century first editions.
The second edition of Frankenstein was published on August in two volumes (by G. and W. B. Whittaker) following the success of the stage play Presumption; or, the Fate of Frankenstein by Richard Brinsley Peake.
This edition credited Mary Shelley as the book author on its title page.
On October the first "popular" edition in one volume appeared, published by Henry Colburn Richard Bentley.
This edition was heavily revised by Mary Shelley, partially to make the story less radical.
It included lengthy new preface by the author, presenting somewhat embellished version of the genesis of the story.
This edition is the one most widely published and read now, although few editions follow the text.
Some scholars prefer the original version, arguing that it preserves the spirit of Mary Shelley vision (see Anne K. Mellor "Choosing Text of Frankenstein to Teach" in the W. W. Norton Critical edition).
An English editorial cartoonist conceives the Irish Fenian movement as akin to Frankenstein creature, in the wake of the Phoenix Park murders in an issue of Punch.
Part of Frankenstein rejection of his creation is the fact that he does not give it name, which causes lack of identity.
Instead it is referred to by words such as "wretch", "monster", "creature", "demon", "devil", "fiend", and "it".
When Frankenstein converses with the creature in Chapter he addresses it as "vile insect", "abhorred monster", "fiend", "wretched devil", and "abhorred devil".
During telling of Frankenstein, Shelley referred to the creature as "Adam".
Shelley was referring to the first man in the Garden of Eden, as in her epigraph:
Did request thee, Maker, from my clay
Although the creature would be described in later works as composite of whole body parts grafted together from cadavers and reanimated by the use of electricity, this description is not consistent with Shelley work; both the use of electricity and the cobbled together image of Frankenstein monster were more the result of James Whale popular film adaptation of the story, and other early motion picture works based upon the creature.
In Shelley original work, Dr. Frankenstein discovers previously unknown but elemental principle of life, and that insight allows him to develop method to imbue vitality into inanimate matter, though the exact nature of the process is left largely ambiguous.
After great deal of hesitation in exercising this power, Frankenstein spends two years painstakingly constructing the creature proportionally large body (one anatomical feature at time, from raw materials supplied by "the dissecting room and the slaughter house"), which he then brings to life using his unspecified process.
The creature has often been mistakenly called "Frankenstein".
In one author said "It is strange to note how well nigh universally the term "Frankenstein" is misused, even by intelligent people, as describing some hideous monster".
Edith Wharton The Reef describes an unruly child as an "infant Frankenstein.
David Lindsay "The Bridal Ornament", published in The Rover, June mentioned "the maker of poor Frankenstein."
After the release of Whale cinematic Frankenstein, the public at large began speaking of the creature itself as "Frankenstein".
This also occurs in Frankenstein films, including Bride of Frankenstein and several subsequent films, as well as in film titles such as Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein.
Furthermore, the film Son of Frankenstein introduced an evil laboratory assistant, Ygor (Bela Lugosi), who never existed in the original narrative.
Mary Shelley maintained that she derived the name Frankenstein from dream vision.
Despite her public claims of originality, however, number of other sources have been suggested as Shelley actual inspiration.
The German name Frankenstein means "stone of the Franks", and is associated with various places in Germany, including Frankenstein Castle (Burg Frankenstein) in Darmstadt, Hesse, and Frankenstein Castle in Frankenstein, town in the Palatinate.
There is also castle called Frankenstein in Bad Salzungen, Thuringia, and municipality called Frankenstein in Saxony.
Until Ząbkowice Śląskie, now city in Lower Silesian Voivodeship, Poland, but was mainly populated by Germans and was the site of scandal involving gravediggers in which has been suggested as an inspiration to the author.
Finally, the name is borne by the aristocratic House of Franckenstein from Franconia.
Radu Florescu argues that Mary and Percy Shelley visited Frankenstein Castle near Darmstadt in during their return to England from their elopement to Switzerland.
It was at this castle that notorious alchemist, Conrad Dippel, had experimented with human bodies, and Florescu reasons that Mary suppressed mention of her visit in order to maintain her public claim of originality.
Day supports Florescu position that Mary Shelley knew of and visited Frankenstein Castle before writing her debut novel.
Day includes details of an alleged description of the Frankenstein castle that exists in Mary Shelley 'lost' journals.
According to Jörg Heléne, the 'lost journals', as well as Florescu claims, cannot be verified.
A possible interpretation of the name Victor is derived from Paradise Lost by John Milton, great influence on Shelley (a quotation from Paradise Lost is on the opening page of Frankenstein and Shelley even has the monster himself read it).
Milton frequently refers to God as "the Victor" in Paradise Lost, and Shelley sees Victor as playing God by creating life.
In addition, Shelley portrayal of the monster owes much to the character of Satan in Paradise Lost; indeed, the monster says, after reading the epic poem, that he empathizes with Satan role in the story.
There are many similarities between Victor and Percy Shelley, Mary husband.
Victor was pen name of Percy Shelley, as in the collection of poetry he wrote with his sister Elizabeth, Original Poetry by Victor and Cazire.
There is speculation that one of Mary Shelley models for Victor Frankenstein was Percy, who at Eton had "experimented with electricity and magnetism as well as with gunpowder and numerous chemical reactions", and whose rooms at Oxford were filled with scientific equipment.
Percy Shelley was the first born son of wealthy country squire with strong political connections and descendant of Sir Bysshe Shelley, Baronet of Castle Goring, and Richard Fitzalan, Earl of Arundel.
Victor family is one of the most distinguished of that republic and his ancestors were counselors and syndics.
Percy had sister named Elizabeth; Victor had an adopted sister named Elizabeth.
On February Mary Shelley gave birth to baby two months prematurely, and the baby died two weeks later.
Percy did not care about the condition of this premature infant and left with Claire, Mary stepsister, for lurid affair.
When Victor saw the creature come to life he fled the apartment, though the newborn creature approached him, as child would parent."
The question of Victor responsibility to the creature is one of the main themes of Shelley book.
The Modern Prometheus is the novel subtitle (though some modern editions now drop the subtitle, mentioning it only in an introduction).
Prometheus, in later versions of Greek mythology, was the Titan who created mankind at the behest of Zeus.
He made being in the image of the gods that could have spirit breathed into it.
Prometheus taught man to hunt, read, and heal their sick, but after he tricked Zeus into accepting poor quality offerings from humans, Zeus kept fire from mankind.
Prometheus, being the creator, took back the fire from Zeus to give to man.
When Zeus discovered this, he sentenced Prometheus to be eternally punished by fixing him to rock of Caucasus, where each day an eagle would peck out his liver, only for the liver to regrow the next day because of his immortality as god.
He was intended to suffer alone for eternity, but eventually Heracles (Hercules) released him.
Prometheus was also myth told in Latin, but was very different story.
In this version Prometheus makes man from clay and water, again very relevant theme to Frankenstein, as Victor rebels against the laws of nature (how life is naturally made) and as result is punished by his creation.
In Edison Studios released the first motion picture adaptation of Shelley story.
The Titan in the Greek mythology of Prometheus parallels Victor Frankenstein.
Victor work by creating man by new means reflects the same innovative work of the Titan in creating humans.
Some have argued that Mary Shelley saw Prometheus not as hero but rather as something of devil, and blamed him for bringing fire to man and thereby seducing the human race to the vice of eating meat (fire brought cooking which brought hunting and killing).
Byron was particularly attached to the play Prometheus Bound by Aeschylus, and Percy Shelley would soon write his own Prometheus Unbound .
The term "Modern Prometheus" was actually coined by Immanuel Kant in reference to Benjamin Franklin and his experiments with electricity.
Shelley incorporated number of different sources into her work, one of which was the Promethean myth from Ovid.
The influence of John Milton Paradise Lost, and Samuel Taylor Coleridge The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, are also clearly evident within the novel.
Mary is likely to have acquired some ideas for Frankenstein character from Humphry Davy book Elements of Chemical Philosophy, in which he had written that "science has bestowed upon man powers which may be called creative; which have enabled him to change and modify the beings around him ...".
References to the French Revolution run through the novel; possible source may lie in François Félix Nogaret Le Miroir des événemens actuels, ou la Belle au plus offrant a political parable about scientific progress featuring an inventor named Frankésteïn who creates life sized automaton.
Percy Bysshe Shelley poem "Mutability" is also quoted and its theme of the role of the subconscious is discussed in prose.
The Creature also quotes passage of the poem.
His name has never appeared as the author of the poem although other poets are cited by name in the novel, implying that Mary wrote the poem and developed the psychological ideas.
Another potential reason is to conceal his contributions to the novel.
Many writers and historians have attempted to associate several then popular natural philosophers (now called physical scientists) with Shelley work on account of several notable similarities.
Two of the most noted natural philosophers among Shelley contemporaries were Giovanni Aldini, who made many public attempts at human reanimation through bio electric Galvanism in London and Johann Konrad Dippel, who was supposed to have developed chemical means to extend the life span of humans.
While Shelley was aware of both these men and their activities, she makes no mention of or reference to them or their experiments in any of her published or released notes.
Illustration by Theodor von Holst from the frontispiece of the edition
Frankenstein has been both well received and disregarded since its anonymous publication in .
Critical reviews of that time demonstrate these two views, along with confused speculation as to the identity of the author.
The Belle Assemblée described the novel as "very bold fiction" .
The Quarterly Review stated that "the author has the power of both conception and language" .
Sir Walter Scott, writing in Blackwood Edinburgh Magazine, congratulated "the author original genius and happy power of expression" although he is less convinced about the way in which the monster gains knowledge about the world and language.
The Edinburgh Magazine and Literary Miscellany hoped to see "more productions from this author" .
On the other hand, the Quarterly Review described it "a tissue of horrible and disgusting absurdity".
In two other reviews where the author is known as the daughter of William Godwin, the criticism of the novel makes reference to the feminine nature of Mary Shelley.
The British Critic attacks the novel flaws as the fault of the author: "The writer of it is, we understand, female; this is an aggravation of that which is the prevailing fault of the novel; but if our authoress can forget the gentleness of her sex, it is no reason why we should; and we shall therefore dismiss the novel without further comment" .
The Literary Panorama and National Register attacks the novel as "feeble imitation of Mr. Godwin novels" produced by the "daughter of celebrated living novelist" .
Despite the reviews, Frankenstein achieved an almost immediate popular success.
It became widely known especially through melodramatic theatrical adaptations—Mary Shelley saw production of Presumption; or The Fate of Frankenstein, play by Richard Brinsley Peake, in .
A French translation appeared as early as (Frankenstein: ou le Prométhée Moderne, translated by Jules Saladin).
Critical reception of Frankenstein has been largely positive since the mid century.
although there are also critics such as Germaine Greer, who criticized the novel as terrible due to technical and narrative defects (such as it featuring three narrators that speak in the same way).
ven the Lacanian subgroup of psychoanalytic criticism, for instance, has produced at least half dozen discrete readings of the novel".
The novel today is generally considered to be landmark work of romantic and gothic literature, as well as science fiction.
Film director Guillermo del Toro describes Frankenstein as "the quintessential teenage book", adding "You don't belong.
You were brought to this world by people that don't care for you and you are thrown into world of pain and suffering, and tears and hunger.
It an amazing book written by teenage girl.
Professor of philosophy Patricia MacCormack says the creature, brought to life by Victor Frankenstein, addresses the most fundamental human questions: "It the idea of asking your maker what your purpose is.
Why are we here, what can we do?
There are numerous novels retelling or continuing the story of Frankenstein and his monster.
Further information on derivative works: Frankenstein in popular culture
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Frankenstein" news newspapers books scholar JSTOR (March (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
See also: List of films featuring Frankenstein monster
A photo of Charles Ogle as the monster in Frankenstein
A promotional photo of Boris Karloff, as Frankenstein monster, using Jack Pierce makeup design
Richard Brinsley Peake adaptation, Presumption; or, the Fate of Frankenstein, was seen by Mary Shelley and her father William Godwin at the English Opera House.
Henry M. Milner adaptation, The Man and The Monster; or The Fate of Frankenstein opened on July at the Royal Coburg Theatre, London.
Frankenstein, or The Vampire Victim was musical burlesque written by Richard Henry (a pseudonym of Richard Butler and Henry Chance Newton).
Edison Studios produced the first Frankenstein film, directed by J. Searle Dawley.
Life Without Soul, the second film adaptation of Mary Shelley novel, was released.
No known print of the film has survived.
The Monster of Frankenstein, directed by Eugenio Testa, starring Luciano Albertini and Umberto Guarracino.
Universal Studios' Frankenstein, directed by James Whale, starring Colin Clive, Mae Clarke, John Boles, Edward Van Sloan, Dwight Frye, and Boris Karloff as the monster.
James Whale directed the sequel to the film, Bride of Frankenstein, starring Colin Clive as Frankenstein, and Boris Karloff as the monster once more.
This incorporated the novel plot motif of Frankenstein creating bride for the monster omitted from Whale earlier film.
There were two more sequels, prior to the Universal "monster rally" films combining multiple monsters from various movie series or film franchises.
Son of Frankenstein was another Universal monster movie with Boris Karloff as the Creature.
Also in the film were Basil Rathbone as the title character and Bela Lugosi as the sinister assistant Ygor.
Karloff ended playing the Frankenstein monster with this film.
The Ghost of Frankenstein featured brain transplanting and new monster, played by Lon Chaney Jr.
The film also starred Evelyn Ankers and Bela Lugosi.
Universal did "monster rally" films featuring Frankenstein Monster, Dracula and the Wolf Man.
Included would be Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man, House of Frankenstein, House of Dracula and Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein.
The last three films introduced Glenn Strange as Frankenstein monster.
Hammer Films in England did string of Frankenstein films starring Peter Cushing, including The Curse of Frankenstein, The Revenge of Frankenstein and Frankenstein Must Be Destroyed.
Co starring in these films were Christopher Lee, Hazel Court, Veronica Carlson and Simon Ward.
Another Hammer film, The Horror of Frankenstein, starred Ralph Bates as the main character, Victor Frankenstein.
Toho Studios created the film Frankenstein Conquers the World or Frankenstein vs. Baragon, followed by The War of the Gargantuas.
comedic stage adaptation, Frankenstein Monster, was written by Sally Netzel and produced by the Dallas Theater Center.
The TV film Frankenstein: The True Story appeared on NBC.
The movie starred Leonard Whiting, Michael Sarrazin, James Mason, and Jane Seymour.
Broadway adaptation by Victor Gialanella played for one performance (after previews) and was considered the most expensive flop ever produced to that date.
The flop Broadway production yielded TV film starring Robert Powell, Carrie Fisher, David Warner, and John Gielgud.
Frankenstein became Turner Network Television film directed by David Wickes, starring Patrick Bergin and Randy Quaid.
John Mills played the blind man.
Mary Shelley Frankenstein appeared in theatres, directed by and starring Kenneth Branagh, with Robert De Niro and Helena Bonham Carter.
Its all star cast also included John Cleese, Ian Holm, and Tom Hulce.
Frankenstein, two episode mini series starring Alec Newman, with Luke Goss and Donald Sutherland.
Frankenstein, an award winning musical adaptation by Jonathan Christenson with set, lighting, and costume design by Bretta Gerecke for Catalyst Theatre in Edmonton, Alberta.
In March, BBC broadcast Colin Teague live production from Kirkstall Abbey, Leeds, billed as Frankenstein Wedding, Live in Leeds.
About the same time, the National Theatre, London presented stage version of Frankenstein, which ran until May .
The play was written by Nick Dear and directed by Danny Boyle.
Jonny Lee Miller and Benedict Cumberbatch alternated the roles of Frankenstein and the Creature.
The National Theatre broadcast live performances of the play worldwide on March.
An interactive ebook app created by Inkle and Profile Books that retells the story with added interactive elements.
Penny Dreadful is horror TV series that airs on Showtime, that features Victor Frankenstein as well as his creature.
Frankenstein, modern day adaptation written and directed by Bernard Rose.
Victor Frankenstein is an American film directed by Paul McGuigan.
Frankenstein, full length ballet production by Liam Scarlett.
Some performances were also live simulcasts worldwide.
I'm Sorry the Bridge Is Out, You'll Have to Spend the Night and its sequel, Frankenstein Unbound (Another Monster Musical), are pair of musical comedies written by Bobby Pickett and Sheldon Allman.
The casts of both feature several classic horror characters including Dr. Frankenstein and his monster.
The Rocky Horror Show, is British horror comedy stage musical written by Richard O'Brian in which Dr. Frank N. Furter has created creature (Rocky), to satisfy his (pro)creative drives.
Elements are similar to I'm Sorry the Bridge Is Out, You'll Have to Spend the Night.
Usually, Frankenstein is man whose dedication to science takes him too far, but here his interest is to rule the world by creating new species that will obey him and do his bidding.
Directed by Mel Brooks, this sequel spoof has been listed as one of the best movie comedies of any comedy genre ever made, even prompting an American film preservation program to include it on its listings.
It reuses many props from James Whale Frankenstein and is shot in black and white with style credits.
Gene Wilder portrayed the descendant of Dr. Frankenstein (who insists on pronouncing it "Fronkonsteen"), with Peter Boyle as the Monster.
The Rocky Horror Picture Show is the film adaptation of the British rock musical stageplay, The Rocky Horror Show written by Richard O'Brien.
Frankenweenie is parody short film directed by Tim Burton, starring Barrett Oliver, Shelley Duvall and Daniel Stern.
The Bride starring Sting as Baron Charles Frankenstein and Jennifer Beals as Eva, woman he creates in the same fashion as his infamous monster.
Gothic, directed by Ken Russell, is the story of the night that Mary Shelley gave birth to Frankenstein.
Starring Gabriel Byrne, Julian Sands, Natasha Richardson.
Frankenstein (フランケンシュタイン) is manga adaptation of Shelley novel by Junji Ito.
A pantomime script by David Swan, combining elements of Frankenstein, Dracula, and traditional British panto.
Combines time travel story with the story of Shelley novel.
Scientist Joe Buchanan accidentally creates time rift which takes him back to the events of the novel.
Filmed as low budget independent film by Roger Corman in based on novel published in by Brian Aldiss.
This novel bears no relation to the stage musical with the same name listed above.
Khatra (film) is Hindi movie of Bollywood made by director H. N. Singh loosely based on the story, Frankenstein.
Monster Mash is film adaptation of I'm Sorry the Bridge Is Out, You'll Have to Spend the Night starring Bobby Pickett as Dr. Frankenstein.
The film also features Candace Cameron Bure, Anthony Crivello and Mink Stole.
Billy Frankenstein is very loose adaptation about boy who moves into mansion with his family and brings the Frankenstein monster to life.
The film was directed by Fred Olen Ray.
Frankenstein made for TV film based on Dean Koontz Frankenstein.
Frankenstein vs. the Creature from Blood Cove, minute feature film homage of classic monsters and Atomic Age creature features, shot in black and white, and directed by William Winckler.
The Frankenstein Monster design and make up was based on the character descriptions in Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley novel.
The Diary of Anne Frankenstein, short film from Chillerrama.
Frankenstein: Day of the Beast is an independent horror film based loosely on the original book.
Victor Frankenstein appears in the ABC show Once Upon Time, fantasy series on ABC that features multiple characters from fairy tales and classic literature trapped in the real world.
Frankenweenie, Tim Burton feature film remake of his short film of the same name.
In the Adventure Time episode "Princess Monster Wife", the Ice King removes body parts from all the princesses that rejected him and creates jigsaw wife to love him.
Nightmare on Lime Street, Fred Lawless comedy play starring David Gest staged at the Royal Court Theatre, Liverpool.
I, Frankenstein is fantasy action film.
The film stars Aaron Eckhart as Adam Frankenstein and Bill Nighy.
The film is based on the graphic novel.
Frankenstein, MD, web show by Pemberly Digital starring Victoria, female adaptation of Victor.
The Supernatural season episodes Book of the Damned, Dark Dynasty and The Prisoner feature the Styne Family which member Eldon Styne identifies as the descendants of the house of Frankenstein.
According to Eldon, Mary Shelley had learned their secrets while on visit to Castle Frankenstein and wrote book based on her experiences, forcing the Frankensteins underground as the Stynes.
The Stynes, through bioengineering and surgical enhancements, feature many of the superhuman features of Frankenstein monster.
The Frankenstein Chronicles is British television drama series, starring Sean Bean as John Marlott and Anna Maxwell Martin as Mary Shelley.
Second Chance, TV series known at one point as Frankenstein, was inspired by the classic.
Frankenstein and the Origins of Science Fiction".
Anticipations: Essays on Early Science Fiction and its Precursors.
This day is published, in vols., price .
d., Work of Imagination, to be entitled Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus.
The Monsters: Mary Shelley and the Curse of Frankenstein.
Her 'Midnight Pillow': Mary Shelley and the Creation of Frankenstein".
The Detached Retina: Aspects of SF and Fantasy by Brian Aldiss page .
Bergen Evans, Comfortable Words, New York: Random House,
Bryan Garner, Dictionary of Modern American Usage, New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
Merriam Webster Dictionary of American English, Merriam Webster:
The Strange and Twisted Life of "Frankenstein"".
Frankenstein: Penetrating the Secrets of Nature: The Birth of Frankenstein".
Why did Mary Shelley Write Frankenstein".
Philisophical and Literary Sources of Frankenstein".
Dr. John Polidori, "The Vampyre" The New Monthly Magazine and Universal Register; London: H. Colburn, –.
Quoted in Spark, from Mary Shelley introduction to the edition of Frankenstein.
Radford, Tim, Frankenstein hour of creation identified by astronomers, The Guardian, Sunday September (retrieved January )
The Strange and Twisted Life of 'Frankenstein'".
Bennett, Betty T. Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley: An Introduction.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, .
A year old secret': plaque to mark Bath hidden role in Frankenstein".
Mary Shelley, with Percy Shelley .
Archived from the original on September .
She began that novel as Mary Godwin in June when she was eighteen years old, she finished it as Mary Shelley in April/May when she was nineteen .
and she published it anonymously on January when she was twenty.
D. L. Macdonald and Kathleen Scherf, "A Note on the Text", Frankenstein, ed., Peterborough: Broadview Press, .
See forward to Barnes and Noble classic edition.
The edition published by Forgotten Books is the original text, as is the "Ignatius Critical Edition".
Vintage Books has an edition presenting both versions.
Frankenstein:Celluloid Monster at the National Library of Medicine website of the (U.S.) National Institutes of Health
Frankenstein: Penetrating the Secrets of Nature Exhibit Text" (PDF).
National Library of Medicine and ALA Public Programs Office.
Archived from the original (PDF) on December .
Retrieved December from the traveling exhibition Frankenstein: Penetrating the Secrets of Nature Archived November at the Wayback Machine
Author Digest: The World Great Stories in Brief, by Rossiter Johnson,
Mary Shelley Frankenstein, Castle Frankenstein and the alchemist Johann Conrad Dippel".
Shelley and the Miltonic Element in Mary Shelley Frankenstein."
Milton and the Romantics, (December, –.
Original Poetry by Victor and Cazire".
Shelley Clary walk out, as usual, to heaps of places A letter from Hookham to say that Harriet has been brought to bed of son and heir.
Shelley writes number of circular letters on this event, which ought to be ushered in with ringing of bells, etc., for it is the son of his wife."
For example, the Longman study edition published in India in by Pearson Education
In the best known versions of the Prometheus story, by Hesiod and Aeschylus, Prometheus merely brings fire to mankind.
But in other versions, such as several of Aesop fables (See in particular Fable Sappho (Fragment and Ovid Metamorphoses, Prometheus is the actual creator of humanity.
Douthwaite, "The Frankenstein of the French Revolution" chapter of The Frankenstein of and other Lost Chapters from Revolutionary France (Frankenstein of and other Lost Chapters from Revolutionary France, ).
The Science of Life and Death in Mary Shelley Frankenstein".
This illustration is reprinted in the frontispiece to the edition of Frankenstein
Review of Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus".
Yes, Frankenstein really was written by Mary Shelley.
It obvious because the book is so bad".
Frankenstein the True Story; or Rousseau Judges Jean Jacques.
Published in the Norton critical edition.
UTM.edu Lynn Alexander, Department of English, University of Tennessee at Martin.
a c e g "Frankenstein: Behind the monster smash".
Shelly Ghost: Reshaping the image of literary family".
A Chronology of the Life of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley: –".
Women Writers Dramatized: Calendar of Performances from Narrative Works Published in English to .
a Friedman, Lester D.; Kavey, Allison B.
Monstrous Progeny: History of the Frankenstein Narratives.
THE SCREEN; 'Son of Frankenstein,' With Boris Karloff, Seen at the Rivoli; New Soviet Film at the Cameo At the Cameo".
Review: Erle C. Kenton "The Ghost of Frankenstein," Starring Lon Chaney Jr. and Cedric Hardwicke".
Glenn Strange, Actor, Dies; Was 'Gunsmoke' Bartender".
Blood on the Stage, Milestone Plays of Crime, Mystery and Detection, by Amnon Kabatchnik.
Frankenstein: the True Story Part Two ".
FRANKENSTEIN" NEARLY CAME BACK TO LIFE".
British film directors a critical guide.
Perfectly Frank: Memorable Portrayals of Frankenstein Monster".
Lowry, Brian; Lowry, Brian October ).
Announcing FRANKENSTEIN, new interactive literary app for iPad and iPhone".
Penny Dreadful' recap: 'Abomination' puts demand on Frankenstein".
Pedersen, Erik; Pedersen, Erik April ).
Alchemy Acquires Bernard Rose 'Frankenstein'; Miles Heizer Gets On Lionsgate 'Nerve Film Roundup".
Hello Igor... Daniel Radcliffe gets into character on the set of the brand new Frankenstein movie, The Daily Mail
The world premiere of Liam Scarlett new full length ballet, inspired by Mary Shelley Gothic masterpiece".
Frankenstein to be relayed live to BP Big Screens in the UK and cinemas around the world on May ".
I'm Sorry, the Bridge is Out, You'll Have to Spend the Night: Musical.
Copyright and the Rocky Horror Picture Show".
Screen: Butchery Binge:Morrissey 'Warhol Frankenstein' Opens".
a "'Frankenweenie': Burton Revives Morbid Favorite".
Gothic (Re)Visions: Writing Women as Readers.
Frankenstein, The Panto by David Swan NODA".
Andreeva, Nellie; Andreeva, Nellie October ).
TNT To Develop 'Frankenstein' Drama Series Based On Dean Koontz Novels".
Hatchet director Adam Green on his new anthology movie, 'Chillerama'".
Once Upon Time recap: In the Name of the Brother".
A Nightmare On Lime Street Royal Court Theatre, Liverpool".
I, Frankenstein': NOT the Worst Movie Ever".
Travers, Ben; Travers, Ben February ).
The Frankenstein Chronicles' Review: Sean Bean Netflix Series Comes Roaring to Life After Three Years in Purgatory".
Rob Kazinsky Is Fox 'Frankenstein' Monster".
