For the character, see Beowulf (hero).
BeowulfFirst page of Beowulf in Cotton Vitellius A. xvAuthor(s)UnknownLanguageWest Saxon dialect of Old EnglishDatec.
AD (date of story), c. AD (date of manuscript)State of existenceManuscript suffered damage from fire in Manuscript(s)Cotton Vitellius A. xvFirst printed editionThorkelin GenreEpic heroic writingVerse formAlliterative verseLengthc.
linesSubjectThe battles of Beowulf, the Geatish hero, in youth and old agePersonagesBeowulf, Hygelac, Hrothgar, Wealhþeow, Hrothulf, Æschere, Unferth, Grendel, Grendel mother, Wiglaf, Hildeburh.
Beowulf (/ˈbeɪəwʊlf/;) is an Old English epic poem consisting of alliterative lines.
It is one of the most important works of Old English literature.
The date of composition is matter of contention among scholars; the only certain dating pertains to the manuscript, which was produced between and .
The author was an anonymous Anglo Saxon poet, referred to by scholars as the "Beowulf poet".
The story is set in Scandinavia.
Beowulf, hero of the Geats, comes to the aid of Hrothgar, the king of the Danes, whose mead hall in Heorot has been under attack by monster known as Grendel.
After Beowulf slays him, Grendel mother attacks the hall and is then also defeated.
Victorious, Beowulf goes home to Geatland (Götaland in modern Sweden) and later becomes king of the Geats.
After period of fifty years has passed, Beowulf defeats dragon, but is mortally wounded in the battle.
After his death, his attendants cremate his body and erect tower on headland in his memory.
The full story survives in the manuscript known as the Nowell Codex.
It has no title in the original manuscript, but has become known by the name of the story protagonist.
In the manuscript was badly damaged by fire that swept through Ashburnham House in London that had collection of medieval manuscripts assembled by Sir Robert Bruce Cotton.
The Nowell Codex is currently housed in the British Library.
Approximate central regions of tribes mentioned in Beowulf, with the location of the Angles in Angeln.
See Scandza for details of Scandinavia political fragmentation in the century.
The events in the poem take place over most of the sixth century, after the Anglo Saxons had started migrating to England and before the beginning of the seventh century, time when the Anglo Saxons were either newly arrived or were still in close contact with their Germanic kinsmen in Northern Germany and southern Scandinavia.
The stories in the poem may have been brought to England by people of Geatish origins.
Some suggest that Beowulf was first composed in the century at Rendlesham in East Anglia, as the Sutton Hoo ship burial shows close connections with Scandinavia, and the East Anglian royal dynasty, the Wuffingas, may have been descendants of the Geatish Wulfings.
Others have associated this poem with the court of King Alfred the Great or with the court of King Cnut the Great.
The poem blends fictional, legendary and historic elements.
Although Beowulf himself is not mentioned in any other Anglo Saxon manuscript, scholars generally agree that many of the other figures referred to in Beowulf also appear in Scandinavian sources.
Specific works are designated in the following section).
This concerns not only individuals (e.g., Healfdene, Hroðgar, Halga, Hroðulf, Eadgils and Ohthere), but also clans (e.g., Scyldings, Scylfings and Wulfings) and certain events (e.g., the battle between Eadgils and Onela).
The raid by King Hygelac into Frisia is mentioned by Gregory of Tours in his History of the Franks and can be dated to around .
In Denmark, recent archaeological excavations at Lejre, where Scandinavian tradition located the seat of the Scyldings, i.e., Heorot, have revealed that hall was built in the mid century, exactly the time period of Beowulf.
Three halls, each about metres ft) long, were found during the excavation.
The majority view appears to be that people such as King Hroðgar and the Scyldings in Beowulf are based on historical people from century Scandinavia.
Like the Finnesburg Fragment and several shorter surviving poems, Beowulf has consequently been used as source of information about Scandinavian figures such as Eadgils and Hygelac, and about continental Germanic figures such as Offa, king of the continental Angles.
Finds from the western mound, left, excavated in at Gamla Uppsala, Sweden, support Beowulf and the sagas.
century archaeological evidence may confirm elements of the Beowulf story.
Eadgils was buried at Uppsala according to Snorri Sturluson.
When the western mound (to the left in the photo) was excavated in the finds showed that powerful man was buried in large barrow, c. on bear skin with two dogs and rich grave offerings.
The eastern mound was excavated in and contained the remains of woman, or woman and young man.
The middle barrow has not been excavated.
The protagonist Beowulf, hero of the Geats, comes to the aid of Hrothgar, king of the Danes, whose great hall, Heorot, is plagued by the monster Grendel.
Beowulf kills Grendel with his bare hands and Grendel mother with giant sword that he found in her lair.
Later in his life, Beowulf becomes king of the Geats, and finds his realm terrorized by dragon, some of whose treasure had been stolen from his hoard in burial mound.
He attacks the dragon with the help of his thegns or servants, but they do not succeed.
Beowulf decides to follow the dragon to its lair at Earnanæs, but only his young Swedish relative Wiglaf, whose name means "remnant of valour", dares to join him.
Beowulf finally slays the dragon, but is mortally wounded in the struggle.
He is cremated and burial mound by the sea is erected in his honour.
Beowulf is considered an epic poem in that the main character is hero who travels great distances to prove his strength at impossible odds against supernatural demons and beasts.
The poem also begins in medias res or simply, "in the middle of things," which is characteristic of the epics of antiquity.
Although the poem begins with Beowulf arrival, Grendel attacks have been an ongoing event.
An elaborate history of characters and their lineages is spoken of, as well as their interactions with each other, debts owed and repaid, and deeds of valour.
The warriors form kind of brotherhood linked by loyalty to their lord.
The poem begins and ends with funerals: at the beginning of the poem for Scyld Scefing and at the end for Beowulf (–).
Beowulf begins with the story of Hrothgar, who constructed the great hall Heorot for himself and his warriors.
In it, he, his wife Wealhtheow, and his warriors spend their time singing and celebrating.
Grendel, troll like monster said to be descended from the biblical Cain, is pained by the sounds of joy.
Grendel attacks the hall and kills and devours many of Hrothgar warriors while they sleep.
Hrothgar and his people, helpless against Grendel, abandon Heorot.
Beowulf, young warrior from Geatland, hears of Hrothgar troubles and with his king permission leaves his homeland to assist Hrothgar.
Beowulf and his men spend the night in Heorot.
Beowulf refuses to use any weapon because he holds himself to be the equal of Grendel.
When Grendel enters the hall, Beowulf, who has been feigning sleep, leaps up to clench Grendel hand.
Grendel and Beowulf battle each other violently.
Beowulf retainers draw their swords and rush to his aid, but their blades cannot pierce Grendel skin.
Finally, Beowulf tears Grendel arm from his body at the shoulder and Grendel runs to his home in the marshes where he dies.
Beowulf displays "the whole of Grendel shoulder and arm, his awesome grasp" for all to see at Heorot.
This display would fuel Grendel mother anger in revenge.
The next night, after celebrating Grendel defeat, Hrothgar and his men sleep in Heorot.
Grendel mother, angry that her son has been killed, sets out to get revenge.
Earlier, after the award of treasure, The Geat had been given another lodging"; his assistance would be absent in this battle.
Grendel mother violently kills Æschere, who is Hrothgar most loyal fighter, and escapes.
Hrothgar, Beowulf, and their men track Grendel mother to her lair under lake.
Unferð, warrior who had earlier challenged him, presents Beowulf with his sword Hrunting.
After stipulating number of conditions to Hrothgar in case of his death (including the taking in of his kinsmen and the inheritance by Unferth of Beowulf estate), Beowulf jumps into the lake, and while harassed by water monsters gets to the bottom, where he finds cavern.
Grendel mother pulls him in, and she and Beowulf engage in fierce combat.
At first, Grendel mother appears to prevail, and Hrunting proves incapable of hurting the woman; she throws Beowulf to the ground and, sitting astride him, tries to kill him with short sword, but Beowulf is saved by his armour.
Beowulf spots another sword, hanging on the wall and apparently made for giants, and cuts her head off with it.
Travelling further into Grendel mother lair, Beowulf discovers Grendel corpse and severs his head with the sword, whose blade melts because of the "hot blood".
Beowulf swims back up to the rim of the pond where his men wait.
Carrying the hilt of the sword and Grendel head, he presents them to Hrothgar upon his return to Heorot.
Hrothgar gives Beowulf many gifts, including the sword Nægling, his family heirloom.
The events prompt long reflection by the king, sometimes referred to as "Hrothgar sermon", in which he urges Beowulf to be wary of pride and to reward his thegns.
Beowulf face to face with the fire breathing dragon
Beowulf returns home and eventually becomes king of his own people.
One day, fifty years after Beowulf battle with Grendel mother, slave steals golden cup from the lair of dragon at Earnanæs.
When the dragon sees that the cup has been stolen, it leaves its cave in rage, burning everything in sight.
Beowulf and his warriors come to fight the dragon, but Beowulf tells his men that he will fight the dragon alone and that they should wait on the barrow.
Beowulf descends to do battle with the dragon, but finds himself outmatched.
His men, upon seeing this and fearing for their lives, retreat into the woods.
One of his men, Wiglaf, however, in great distress at Beowulf plight, comes to his aid.
The two slay the dragon, but Beowulf is mortally wounded.
After Beowulf dies, Wiglaf remains by his side, grief stricken.
When the rest of the men finally return, Wiglaf bitterly admonishes them, blaming their cowardice for Beowulf death.
Afterward, Beowulf is ritually burned on great pyre in Geatland while his people wail and mourn him, fearing that without him, the Geats are defenceless against attacks from surrounding tribes.
Afterwards, barrow, visible from the sea, is built in his memory (Beowulf lines –).
The dating of Beowulf has attracted considerable scholarly attention and opinion differs as to whether it was first written in the century or whether the composition of the poem was nearly contemporary with its eleventh century manuscript and whether proto version of the poem (possibly version of the Bear Son Tale) was orally transmitted before being transcribed in its present form.
Albert Lord felt strongly that the manuscript represents the transcription of performance, though likely taken at more than one sitting.
and Tolkien conviction that the poem dates to the century has been defended by Tom Shippey, Leonard Neidorf, Rafael J. Pascual, and R.D.
An analysis of several Old English poems by team including Neidorf suggests that Beowulf is the work of single author.
The claim to an early century date depends in part on scholars who argue that, rather than the transcription of tale from the oral tradition by an earlier literate monk, Beowulf reflects an original interpretation of an earlier version of the story by the manuscript two scribes.
On the other hand, some scholars argue that linguistic, palaeographical, metrical, and onomastic considerations align to support date of composition in the first half of the eighth century; in particular, the poem regular observation of etymological length distinctions (Max Kaluza law) has been thought to demonstrate date of composition in the first half of the eighth century.
Hutcheson, for instance, does not believe Kaluza Law can be used to date the poem, while claiming that "the weight of all the evidence Fulk presents in his book tells strongly in favour of an eighth century date.
Remounted page, British Library Cotton Vitellius A.XV
Beowulf survives in single manuscript dated on palaeographical grounds to the late or early century.
The poem is known only from single manuscript, which is estimated to date from close to AD in which it appears with other works.
The Beowulf manuscript is known as the Nowell Codex, gaining its name from century scholar Laurence Nowell.
The official designation is "British Library, Cotton Vitellius A.XV" because it was one of Sir Robert Bruce Cotton holdings in the Cotton library in the middle of the century.
Many private antiquarians and book collectors, such as Sir Robert Cotton, used their own library classification systems.
Cotton Vitellius A.XV" translates as: the book from the left on shelf (the top shelf) of the bookcase with the bust of Roman Emperor Vitellius standing on top of it, in Cotton collection.
Kevin Kiernan argues that Nowell most likely acquired it through William Cecil, Baron Burghley, in when Nowell entered Cecil household as tutor to his ward, Edward de Vere, Earl of Oxford.
The earliest extant reference to the first foliation of the Nowell Codex was made sometime between and by Franciscus Junius (the younger).
The ownership of the codex before Nowell remains mystery.
The Reverend Thomas Smith and Humfrey Wanley both catalogued the Cotton library (in which the Nowell Codex was held).
Smith catalogue appeared in and Wanley in .
The Beowulf manuscript itself is identified by name for the first time in an exchange of letters in between George Hickes, Wanley assistant, and Wanley.
In the letter to Wanley, Hickes responds to an apparent charge against Smith, made by Wanley, that Smith had failed to mention the Beowulf script when cataloguing Cotton MS. Vitellius A. XV.
Hickes replies to Wanley "I can find nothing yet of Beowulph.
Kiernan theorised that Smith failed to mention the Beowulf manuscript because of his reliance on previous catalogues or because either he had no idea how to describe it or because it was temporarily out of the codex.
It suffered damage in the Cotton Library fire at Ashburnham House in .
Since then, parts of the manuscript have crumbled along with many of the letters.
Rebinding efforts, though saving the manuscript from much degeneration, have nonetheless covered up other letters of the poem, causing further loss.
Kevin Kiernan, in preparing his electronic edition of the manuscript, used fibre optic backlighting and ultraviolet lighting to reveal letters in the manuscript lost from binding, erasure, or ink blotting.
The Beowulf manuscript was transcribed from an original by two scribes, one of whom wrote the prose at the beginning of the manuscript and the first lines before breaking off in mid sentence.
The first scribe made point of carefully regularizing the spelling of the original document by using the common West Saxon language and by avoiding any archaic or dialectical features.
The second scribe, who wrote the remainder, with difference in handwriting noticeable after line seems to have written more vigorously and with less interest.
As result, the second scribe script retains more archaic dialectic features which allow modern scholars to ascribe the poem cultural context.
While both scribes appear to proofread their work, there are nevertheless many errors.
The second scribe was ultimately the more conservative copyist of the two as he did not modify the spelling of the text as he wrote but rather copied what he saw in front of him.
In the way that it is currently bound, the Beowulf manuscript is followed by the Old English poem Judith.
Judith was written by the same scribe that completed Beowulf as evidenced through similar writing style.
Worm holes found in the last leaves of the Beowulf manuscript that aren't present in the Judith manuscript suggest that at one point Beowulf ended the volume.
The rubbed appearance of some leaves also suggest that the manuscript stood on shelf unbound, as is known to have been the case with other Old English manuscripts.
From knowledge of books held in the library at Malmesbury Abbey and available as source works, and from the identification of certain words particular to the local dialect found in the text, the transcription may have taken place there.
The question of whether Beowulf was passed down through oral tradition prior to its present manuscript form has been the subject of much debate, and involves more than simply the issue of its composition.
Rather, given the implications of the theory of oral formulaic composition and oral tradition, the question concerns how the poem is to be understood, and what sorts of interpretations are legitimate.
Scholarly discussion about Beowulf in the context of the oral tradition was extremely active throughout the and .
The debate might be framed starkly as follows: on the one hand, we can hypothesise poem put together from various tales concerning the hero (the Grendel episode, the Grendel mother story, and the fire drake narrative).
These fragments would have been told for many years in tradition, and learned by apprenticeship from one generation of illiterate poets to the next.
The poem is composed orally and extemporaneously, and the archive of tradition on which it draws is oral, pagan, Germanic, heroic, and tribal.
On the other hand, one might posit poem which is composed by literate scribe, who acquired literacy by way of learning Latin (and absorbing Latinate culture and ways of thinking), probably monk and therefore profoundly Christian in outlook.
On this view, the pagan references would be sort of decorative archaising.
There is third view that sees merit in both arguments above and attempts to bridge them, and so cannot be articulated as starkly as they can; it sees more than one Christianity and more than one attitude towards paganism at work in the poem; it sees the poem as initially the product of literate Christian author with one foot in the pagan world and one in the Christian, himself perhaps convert (or one whose forebears had been pagan), poet who was conversant in both oral and literary composition and was capable of masterful "repurposing" of poetry from the oral tradition.
Crowne have proposed the idea that the poem was passed down from reciter to reciter under the theory of oral formulaic composition, which hypothesises that epic poems were (at least to some extent) improvised by whoever was reciting them, and only much later written down.
In his landmark work, The Singer of Tales, Albert Lord refers to the work of Francis Peabody Magoun and others, saying "the documentation is complete, thorough, and accurate.
This exhaustive analysis is in itself sufficient to prove that Beowulf was composed orally.
Examination of Beowulf and other Old English literature for evidence of oral formulaic composition has met with mixed response.
While "themes" (inherited narrative subunits for representing familiar classes of event, such as the "arming the hero",) do exist across Anglo Saxon and other Germanic works, some scholars conclude that Anglo Saxon poetry is mix of oral formulaic and literate patterns, arguing that the poems both were composed on word by word basis and followed larger formulae and patterns.
Larry Benson argued that the interpretation of Beowulf as an entirely formulaic work diminishes the ability of the reader to analyse the poem in unified manner, and with due attention to the poet creativity.
Instead, he proposed that other pieces of Germanic literature contain "kernels of tradition" from which Beowulf borrows and expands upon.
few years later, Ann Watts argued against the imperfect application of one theory to two different traditions: traditional, Homeric, oral formulaic poetry and Anglo Saxon poetry.
Thomas Gardner agreed with Watts, arguing that the Beowulf text is of too varied nature to be completely constructed from set formulae and themes.
John Miles Foley wrote, referring to the Beowulf debate, that while comparative work was both necessary and valid, it must be conducted with view to the particularities of given tradition; Foley argued with view to developments of oral traditional theory that do not assume, or depend upon, ultimately unverifiable assumptions about composition, and instead delineate more fluid continuum of traditionality and textuality.
Finally, in the view of Ursula Schaefer, the question of whether the poem was "oral" or "literate" becomes something of red herring.
In this model, the poem is created, and is interpretable, within both noetic horizons.
Schaefer concept of "vocality" offers neither compromise nor synthesis of the views which see the poem as on the one hand Germanic, pagan, and oral and on the other Latin derived, Christian, and literate, but, as stated by Monika Otter: a 'tertium quid', modality that participates in both oral and literate culture yet also has logic and aesthetic of its own.
Icelandic scholar Grímur Jónsson Thorkelin made the first transcriptions of the manuscript in and published the results in working as part of Danish government historical research commission.
He made one himself, and had another done by professional copyist who knew no Anglo Saxon.
Since that time, however, the manuscript has crumbled further, making these transcripts prized witness to the text.
While the recovery of at least letters can be attributed to them, their accuracy has been called into question, and the extent to which the manuscript was actually more readable in Thorkelin time is uncertain.
Main article: List of translations and artistic depictions of Beowulf
A great number of translations and adaptations are available, in poetry and prose.
Andy Orchard, in Critical Companion to Beowulf, lists "representative" translations in his bibliography, while the Arizona Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies published Marijane Osborn annotated list of over translations and adaptations in .
Beowulf has been translated into at least other languages.
In the historian Sharon Turner translated selected verses into modern English.
This was followed in by John Josias Conybeare who published an edition "in English paraphrase and Latin verse translation.
In Grímur Jónsson Thorkelin published the first complete edition in Latin.
N. F. S. Grundtvig reviewed this edition in and created the first complete verse translation in Danish in .
In John Mitchell Kemble created an important literal translation in English.
In William Morris A. J. Wyatt published the ninth English translation.
Many retellings of Beowulf for children began appearing in the century.
In Francis Barton Gummere full translation in "English imitative meter" was published, and was used as the text of Gareth Hinds graphic novel based on Beowulf in .
First published in Frederick Klaeber Beowulf and The Fight at Finnsburg (which included the poem in Old English, an extensive glossary of Old English terms, and general background information) became the "central source used by graduate students for the study of the poem and by scholars and teachers as the basis of their translations.
Seamus Heaney translation of the poem (referred to by Howell Chickering and many others as "Heaneywulf") was widely publicized.
R. D. Fulk, of Indiana University, published the first facing page edition and translation of the entire Nowell Codex manuscript in the Dumbarton Oaks Medieval Library series in .
Following research in the King College London Archives, Carl Kears proposed that John Porter translation, published in by Bill Griffiths' Pirate Press, was the first complete verse translation of the poem entirely accompanied by facing page Old English.
Translating Beowulf is one of the subjects of the publication Beowulf at Kalamazoo, containing section with essays on translation, and section with reviews of Heaney translation (some of which compare Heaney work with that of Anglo Saxon scholar Roy Liuzza).
J. R. R. Tolkien long awaited translation (edited by his son, Christopher) was published in as Beowulf: Translation and Commentary.
This also includes Tolkien own retelling of the story of Beowulf in his tale, Sellic Spell.
Maria Dahvana Headley published 'The Mere Wife' in retelling the story from the point of view of Grendel Mother.
Neither identified sources nor analogues for Beowulf can be definitively proven, but many conjectures have been made.
These are important in helping historians understand the Beowulf manuscript, as possible source texts or influences would suggest time frames of composition, geographic boundaries within which it could be composed, or range (both spatial and temporal) of influence (i.e.
when it was "popular" and where its "popularity" took it).
There are Scandinavian sources, international folkloric sources, and Celtic sources.
century studies proposed that Beowulf was translated from lost original Scandinavian work, but this idea was quickly abandoned.
But Scandinavian works have continued to be studied as possible source.
but that view was later debunked by Carl Wilhelm von Sydow who pointed out that Beowulf is fundamentally Christian and written at time when any Norse tale would have most likely been pagan.
The epic possible connection to Grettis saga, an Icelandic family saga, was made early on by Guðbrandur Vigfússon .
Grettis saga is story about Grettir Ásmundarson, great grandson of an Icelandic settler, and so cannot be as old as Beowulf.
Axel Olrik claimed that on the contrary, this saga was reworking of Beowulf, and others followed suit.
However, Friedrich Panzer wrote thesis in which both Beowulf and Grettis saga drew from common folkloric source, and this encouraged even detractor such as W. W. Lawrence to reposition his view, and entertain the possibility that certain elements in the saga (such as the waterfall in place of the mere) retained an older form.
The viability of this connection has enjoyed enduring support, and was characterized as one of the few Scandinavian analogues to receive general consensus of potential connection by Theodore M. Andersson .
But that same year, Magnús Fjalldal published volume challenging the perception that there is close parallel, and arguing that tangential similarities were being overemphasized as analogies.
Another candidate for an analogue or possible source is the story of Hrolf kraki and his servant, the legendary bear shapeshifter Bodvar Bjarki.
The story survives in Old Norse Hrólfs saga kraka and Saxo Gesta Danorum.
Hrolf kraki, one of the Skjöldungs, even appears as "Hrothulf" in the Anglo Saxon epic.
Hence story about him and his followers may have developed as early as the century.
Friedrich Panzer wrote thesis that the first part of Beowulf (the Grendel Story) incorporated preexisting folktale material, and that the folktale in question was of the Bear Son Tale (Bärensohnmärchen) type, which has surviving examples all over the world.
This tale type was later catalogued as international folktale type now formally entitled "The Three Stolen Princesses" type in Hans Uther catalogue, although the "Bear Son" is still used in Beowulf criticism, if not so much in folkloristic circles.
However, although this folkloristic approach was seen as step in the right direction, "The Bear Son" tale has later been regarded by many as not close enough parallel to be viable choice.
which has emerged as more attractive folk tale parallel, according to assessment by Andersson.
Similarity of the epic to the Irish folktale "The Hand and the Child" had already been noted by Albert S. Cook and others even earlier, Swedish folklorist Carl Wilhelm von Sydow then made strong argument for the case of parallelism in "The Hand and the Child", because the folktale type demonstrated "monstrous arm" motif that corresponded with Beowulf wrenching off Grendel arm.
For no such correspondence could be perceived in the Bear Son Tale or Grettis saga.
James Carney and Martin Puhvel also agree with this "Hand and the Child" contextualisation.
Puhvel supported the "Hand and the Child" theory through such motifs as (in Andersson words) "the more powerful giant mother, the mysterious light in the cave, the melting of the sword in blood, the phenomenon of battle rage, swimming prowess, combat with water monsters, underwater adventures, and the bear hug style of wrestling.
Attempts to find classical or Late Latin influence or analogue in Beowulf are almost exclusively linked with Homer Odyssey or Virgil Aeneid.
In Albert S. Cook suggested Homeric connection due to equivalent formulas, metonymies, and analogous voyages.
Work also supported the Homeric influence, stating that encounter between Beowulf and Unferth was parallel to the encounter between Odysseus and Euryalus in Books of the Odyssey, even to the point of both characters giving the hero the same gift of sword upon being proven wrong in their initial assessment of the hero prowess.
This theory of Homer influence on Beowulf remained very prevalent in the but started to die out in the following decade when handful of critics stated that the two works were merely "comparative literature", although Greek was known in late century England: Bede states that Theodore of Tarsus, Greek, was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury in and he taught Greek.
Several English scholars and churchmen are described by Bede as being fluent in Greek due to being taught by him; Bede claims to be fluent in Greek himself.
Frederick Klaeber, among others, argued for connection between Beowulf and Virgil near the start of the century, claiming that the very act of writing secular epic in Germanic world represents Virgilian influence.
Virgil was seen as the pinnacle of Latin literature, and Latin was the dominant literary language of England at the time, therefore making Virgilian influence highly likely.
Similarly, in Alistair Campbell stated that the apologue technique used in Beowulf is so rare in epic poetry aside from Virgil that the poet who composed Beowulf could not have written the poem in such manner without first coming across Virgil writings.
It cannot be denied that Biblical parallels occur in the text, whether seen as pagan work with "Christian colouring" added by scribes or as "Christian historical novel, with selected bits of paganism deliberately laid on as 'local colour'," as Margaret E. Goldsmith did in "The Christian Theme of Beowulf".
in its inclusion of references to the Genesis creation narrative, the story of Cain and Abel, Noah and the flood, the Devil, Hell, and the Last Judgment.
The poem mixes the West Saxon and Anglian dialects of Old English, though it predominantly uses West Saxon, as do other Old English poems copied at the time.
There is wide array of linguistic forms in the Beowulf manuscript.
It is this fact that leads some scholars to believe that Beowulf has endured long and complicated transmission through all the main dialect areas.
The poem retains complicated mix of the following dialectical forms: Mercian, Northumbrian, Early West Saxon, Kentish and Late West Saxon.
There are in Beowulf more than distinct words, and almost occur exclusively, or almost exclusively, in this poem and in the other poetical texts.
Considerably more than one third of the total vocabulary is alien from ordinary prose use.
There are, in round numbers, three hundred and sixty uncompounded verbs in Beowulf, and forty of them are poetical words in the sense that they are unrecorded or rare in the existing prose writings.
One hundred and fifty more occur with the prefix ge (reckoning few found only in the past participle), but of these one hundred occur also as simple verbs, and the prefix is employed to render shade of meaning which was perfectly known and thoroughly familiar except in the latest Anglo Saxon period.
Seven hundred of them, including those formed with prefixes, of which fifty (or considerably more than half) have ge , are simple nouns, at the highest reckoning not more than one quarter is absent in prose.
That this is due in some degree to accident is clear from the character of the words, and from the fact that several reappear and are common after the Norman Conquest.
An Old English poem such as Beowulf is very different from modern poetry.
Anglo Saxon poets typically used alliterative verse, form of verse in which the first half of the line (the a verse) is linked to the second half (the b verse) through similarity in initial sound.
In addition, the two halves are divided by caesura: "Oft Scyld Scefing sceaþena þreatum" (l. ).
This verse form maps stressed and unstressed syllables onto abstract entities known as metrical positions.
There is no fixed number of beats per line: the first one cited has three (Oft SCYLD SCEFING, with ictus on the suffix ING) whereas the second has two (SCEAþena ÞREATum).
The poet has choice of epithets or formulae to use in order to fulfil the alliteration.
When speaking or reading Old English poetry, it is important to remember for alliterative purposes that many of the letters are not pronounced in the same way as in modern English.
The letter ⟨h⟩, for example, is always pronounced (Hroðgar: as in the word edge.
Both ⟨f⟩ and ⟨s⟩ vary in pronunciation depending on their phonetic environment.
Between vowels or voiced consonants, they are voiced, sounding like modern ⟨v⟩ and ⟨z⟩, respectively.
Otherwise they are unvoiced, like modern ⟨f⟩ in fat and ⟨s⟩ in sat.
Some letters which are no longer found in modern English, such as thorn, ⟨þ⟩, and eth, ⟨ð⟩ representing both pronunciations of modern English ⟨th⟩, as /θ/ in thing and /ð/ this are used extensively both in the original manuscript and in modern English editions.
The voicing of these characters echoes that of ⟨f⟩ and ⟨s⟩.
Both are voiced (as in this) between other voiced sounds: oðer, laþleas, suþern.
Otherwise they are unvoiced (as in thing): þunor, suð, soþfæst.
Kennings are also significant technique in Beowulf.
They are evocative poetic descriptions of everyday things, often created to fill the alliterative requirements of the metre.
For example, poet might call the sea the "swan road" or the "whale road"; king might be called "ring giver."
There are many kennings in Beowulf, and the device is typical of much of classic poetry in Old English, which is heavily formulaic.
The poem also makes extensive use of elided metaphors.
J. R. R. Tolkien argued in Beowulf: The Monsters and the Critics that the poem is not an epic, and while no conventional term exactly fits, the nearest would be elegy.
The history of modern Beowulf criticism is often said to begin with J. R. R. Tolkien, author and Merton professor of Anglo Saxon at University of Oxford, who in his lecture to the British Academy criticised his contemporaries' excessive interest in its historical implications.
In historical terms, the poem characters would have been Norse pagans (the historical events of the poem took place before the Christianisation of Scandinavia), yet the poem was recorded by Christian Anglo Saxons who had mostly converted from their native Anglo Saxon paganism around the century both Anglo Saxon paganism and Norse paganism share common origin as both are forms of Germanic paganism.
Beowulf thus depicts Germanic warrior society, in which the relationship between the lord of the region and those who served under him was of paramount importance.
In terms of the relationship between characters in Beowulf to God, one might recall the substantial amount of paganism that is present throughout the work.
Literary critics such as Fred C. Robinson argue that the Beowulf poet arguably tries to send message to readers during the Anglo Saxon time period regarding the state of Christianity in their own time.
Robinson argues that the intensified religious aspects of the Anglo Saxon period inherently shape the way in which the Poet alludes to paganism as presented in Beowulf.
The Poet arguably calls on Anglo Saxon readers to recognize the imperfect aspects of their supposed Christian lifestyles.
In other words, the Poet is referencing their "Anglo Saxon Heathenism."
In terms of the characters of the epic itself, Robinson argues that readers are "impressed" by the courageous acts of Beowulf and the speeches of Hrothgar .
But one is ultimately left to feel sorry for both men as they are fully detached from supposed "Christian truth" .
The relationship between the characters of Beowulf, and the overall message of the Poet, regarding their relationship with God is largely debated among readers and literary critics alike.
At the same time, Richard North argues that the Beowulf poet interpreted "Danish myths in Christian form" (as the poem would have served as form of entertainment for Christian audience), and states: "As yet we are no closer to finding out why the first audience of Beowulf liked to hear stories about people routinely classified as damned.
This question is pressing, given... that Anglo Saxons saw the Danes as 'heathens' rather than as foreigners.
Grendel mother and Grendel are described as descendants of Cain, fact which some scholars link to the Cain tradition.
Other scholars disagree, however, as to the meaning and nature of the poem: is it Christian work set in Germanic pagan context?
The question suggests that the conversion from the Germanic pagan beliefs to Christian ones was prolonged and gradual process over several centuries, and it remains unclear the ultimate nature of the poem message in respect to religious belief at the time it was written.
Robert F. Yeager notes the facts that form the basis for these questions:
The only Biblical references in Beowulf are to the Old Testament, and Christ is never mentioned.
The poem is set in pagan times, and none of the characters is demonstrably Christian.
In fact, when we are told what anyone in the poem believes, we learn that they are pagans.
Beowulf own beliefs are not expressed explicitly.
He offers eloquent prayers to higher power, addressing himself to the "Father Almighty" or the "Wielder of All."
Were those the prayers of pagan who used phrases the Christians subsequently appropriated?
Or, did the poem author intend to see Beowulf as Christian Ur hero, symbolically refulgent with Christian virtues?
The location of the composition of the poem is also intensely disputed.
Moorman, the first professor of English Language at University of Leeds, claimed that Beowulf was composed in Yorkshire, but E. Talbot Donaldson claims that it was probably composed more than twelve hundred years ago, during the first half of the eighth century, and that the writer was native of what was then called West Mercia, located in the Western Midlands of England.
However, the late tenth century manuscript "which alone preserves the poem" originated in the kingdom of the West Saxons as it is more commonly known.
Donaldson wrote that "the poet who put the materials into their present form was Christian and poem reflects Christian tradition".
Stanley B. Greenfield has suggested that references to the human body throughout Beowulf emphasise the relative position of thanes to their lord.
He argues that the term "shoulder companion" could refer to both physical arm as well as thane (Aeschere) who was very valuable to his lord (Hrothgar).
With Aeschere death, Hrothgar turns to Beowulf as his new "arm.
Also, Greenfield argues the foot is used for the opposite effect, only appearing four times in the poem.
It is used in conjunction with Unferð (a man described by Beowulf as weak, traitorous, and cowardly).
Greenfield notes that Unferð is described as "at the king feet" (line ).
Unferð is also member of the foot troops, who, throughout the story, do nothing and "generally serve as backdrops for more heroic action.
Daniel Podgorski has argued that the work is best understood as an examination of inter generational vengeance based conflict, or feuding.
In this context, the poem operates as an indictment of feuding conflicts as function of its conspicuous, circuitous, and lengthy depiction of the Geatish Swedish wars—coming into contrast with the poem depiction of the protagonist Beowulf as being disassociated from the ongoing feuds in every way.
David Woodard appears as both Beowulf and Grendel in the stage production Exploding Beowulf (Berlin, )
