For for other stage performances, see Pygmalion.
PygmalionIllustration depicting Mrs. Patrick Campbell as Eliza DoolittleWritten byGeorge Bernard ShawCharacters
Date premiered October ( )Place premieredHofburg Theatre in Vienna, AustriaGenreromantic comedy, social criticismSettingLondon, England
Pygmalion is play by George Bernard Shaw, named after Greek mythological figure.
It was first presented on stage to the public in .
In ancient Greek mythology, Pygmalion fell in love with one of his sculptures, which then came to life.
The general idea of that myth was popular subject for Victorian era English playwrights, including one of Shaw influences, W. S. Gilbert, who wrote successful play based on the story called Pygmalion and Galatea that was first presented in .
Shaw would also have been familiar with the burlesque version, Galatea, or Pygmalion Reversed.
Shaw play has been adapted numerous times, most notably as the musical My Fair Lady and its film version.
Shaw mentioned that the character of Professor Henry Higgins was inspired by several British professors of phonetics: Alexander Melville Bell, Alexander J. Ellis, Tito Pagliardini, but above all, the cantankerous Henry Sweet.
A Sketch Magazine illustration of Mrs. Patrick Campbell as Eliza Doolittle from April .
Shaw wrote the part of Eliza expressly for Campbell, who played opposite Herbert Beerbohm Tree as Henry Higgins.
After creating the role of Col. Pickering in the London production, Philip Merivale (second from right) played Henry Higgins opposite Mrs. Patrick Campbell (right) when Pygmalion was taken to Broadway
Shaw wrote the play in early and read it to famed actress Mrs. Patrick Campbell in June.
She came on board almost immediately, but her mild nervous breakdown contributed to the delay of London production.
Pygmalion premiered at the Hofburg Theatre in Vienna on October in German translation by Shaw Viennese literary agent and acolyte, Siegfried Trebitsch.
Its first New York production opened on March at the German language Irving Place Theatre.
It opened in London on April at Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree His Majesty Theatre and starred Mrs. Campbell as Eliza and Tree as Higgins, running for performances.
Shaw directed the actors through tempestuous rehearsals often punctuated by at least one of the two storming out of the theatre in rage.
Portico of Saint Paul Church (not Wren Cathedral but Inigo Jones Church in Covent Garden vegetable market)' p.m.
A group of people are sheltering from the rain.
Among them are the Eynsford Hills, superficial social climbers eking out living in "genteel poverty", consisting initially of Mrs. Eynsford Hill and her daughter Clara.
Clara brother Freddy enters having earlier been dispatched to secure them cab (which they can ill afford), but being rather timid and faint hearted he has failed to do so.
As he goes off once again to find cab, he bumps into flower girl, Eliza.
Her flowers drop into the mud of Covent Garden, the flowers she needs to survive in her poverty stricken world.
Shortly they are joined by gentleman, Colonel Pickering.
While Eliza tries to sell flowers to the Colonel, bystander informs her that man is writing down everything she says.
The man is Henry Higgins, professor of phonetics.
Eliza worries that Higgins is police officer and will not calm down until Higgins introduces himself.
It soon becomes apparent that he and Colonel Pickering have shared interest in phonetics; indeed, Pickering has come from India to meet Higgins, and Higgins was planning to go to India to meet Pickering.
Higgins tells Pickering that he could pass off the flower girl as duchess merely by teaching her to speak properly.
These words of bravado spark an interest in Eliza, who would love to make changes in her life and become more mannerly, even though, to her, it only means working in flower shop.
At the end of the act, Freddy returns after finding taxi, only to find that his mother and sister have gone and left him with the cab.
The streetwise Eliza takes the cab from him, using the money that Higgins tossed to her, leaving him on his own.
Lynn Fontanne (Eliza) and Henry Travers (Alfred Doolittle) in the Theatre Guild production of Pygmalion
As Higgins demonstrates his phonetics to Pickering, the housekeeper Mrs. Pearce, tells him that young girl wants to see him.
Eliza has shown up because she wishes to talk like lady in flower shop.
She tells Higgins that she will pay for lessons.
He shows no interest, but she reminds him of his boast the previous day.
Higgins claimed that he could pass her for duchess.
Pickering makes bet with him on his claim, and says that he will pay for her lessons if Higgins succeeds.
She is sent off to have bath.
Mrs. Pearce tells Higgins that he must behave himself in the young girl presence, meaning he must stop swearing, and improve his table manners, but he is at loss to understand why she should find fault with him.
Alfred Doolittle, Eliza father, appears with the sole purpose of getting money out of Higgins, having no paternal interest in his daughter welfare.
He sees himself as member of the undeserving poor, and means to go on being undeserving.
With his intelligent mind untamed by education, he has an eccentric view of life.
He is also aggressive, and when Eliza, on her return, sticks her tongue out at him, he goes to hit her, but is prevented by Pickering.
The scene ends with Higgins telling Pickering that they really have got difficult job on their hands.
Higgins bursts in and tells his mother he has picked up "common flower girl" whom he has been teaching.
Mrs. Higgins is not very impressed with her son attempts to win her approval because it is her 'at home' day and she is entertaining visitors.
The visitors are the Eynsford Hills.
Higgins is rude to them on their arrival.
Eliza enters and soon falls into talking about the weather and her family.
Whilst she is now able to speak in beautifully modulated tones, the substance of what she says remains unchanged from the gutter.
She confides her suspicions that her aunt was killed by relatives, and mentions that gin had been "mother milk" to this aunt, and that Eliza own father was always more cheerful after goodly amount of gin.
Higgins passes off her remarks as "the new small talk", and Freddy is enraptured.
When she is leaving, he asks her if she is going to walk across the park, to which she replies, "Walk?
This is the most famous line from the play, and, for many years after the play debut, use of the word 'bloody' was known as pygmalion; Mrs. Campbell was considered to have risked her career by speaking the line on stage.
After she and the Eynsford Hills leave, Henry asks for his mother opinion.
She says the girl is not presentable and is very concerned about what will happen to her, but neither Higgins nor Pickering understands her thoughts of Eliza future, and leave feeling confident and excited about how Eliza will get on.
This leaves Mrs. Higgins feeling exasperated, and exclaiming, "Men!
Higgins, Pickering, and Eliza have returned from ball.
A tired Eliza sits unnoticed, brooding and silent, while Pickering congratulates Higgins on winning the bet.
Higgins scoffs and declares the evening "silly tomfoolery", thanking God it over and saying that he had been sick of the whole thing for the last two months.
Still barely acknowledging Eliza beyond asking her to leave note for Mrs. Pearce regarding coffee, the two retire to bed.
Higgins returns to the room, looking for his slippers, and Eliza throws them at him.
Higgins is taken aback, and is at first completely unable to understand Eliza preoccupation, which aside from being ignored after her triumph is the question of what she is to do now.
When Higgins does understand he makes light of it, saying she could get married, but Eliza interprets this as selling herself like prostitute.
We were above that at the corner of Tottenham Court Road."
Finally she returns her jewellery to Higgins, including the ring he had given her, which he throws into the fireplace with violence that scares Eliza.
Furious with himself for losing his temper, he damns Mrs. Pearce, the coffee and then Eliza, and finally himself, for "lavishing" his knowledge and his "regard and intimacy" on "heartless guttersnipe", and retires in great dudgeon.
Eliza roots around in the fireplace and retrieves the ring.
Mrs. Higgins' drawing room the next morning
Higgins and Pickering, perturbed by the discovery that Eliza has walked out on them, call on Mrs. Higgins to phone the police.
Higgins is particularly distracted, since Eliza had assumed the responsibility of maintaining his diary and keeping track of his possessions, which causes Mrs. Higgins to decry their calling the police as though Eliza were "a lost umbrella".
Doolittle is announced; he emerges dressed in splendid wedding attire and is furious with Higgins, who after their previous encounter had been so taken with Doolittle unorthodox ethics that he had recommended him as the "most original moralist in England" to rich American founding Moral Reform Societies; the American had subsequently left Doolittle pension worth three thousand pounds year, as consequence of which Doolittle feels intimidated into joining the middle class and marrying his missus.
Mrs. Higgins observes that this at least settles the problem of who shall provide for Eliza, to which Higgins objects after all, he paid Doolittle five pounds for her.
Mrs. Higgins informs her son that Eliza is upstairs, and explains the circumstances of her arrival, alluding to how marginalised and overlooked Eliza felt the previous night.
Higgins is unable to appreciate this, and sulks when told that he must behave if Eliza is to join them.
Doolittle is asked to wait outside.
Eliza enters, at ease and self possessed.
Higgins blusters but Eliza isn't shaken and speaks exclusively to Pickering.
Throwing Higgins' previous insults back at him ("Oh, I'm only squashed cabbage leaf"), Eliza remarks that it was only by Pickering example that she learned to be lady, which renders Higgins speechless.
Eliza goes on to say that she has completely left behind the flower girl she was, and that she couldn't utter any of her old sounds if she tried at which point Doolittle emerges from the balcony, causing Eliza to relapse totally into her gutter speech.
Higgins is jubilant, jumping up and crowing over her.
Doolittle explains his situation and asks if Eliza will come with him to his wedding.
Pickering and Mrs. Higgins also agree to go, and leave with Doolittle and Eliza to follow.
The scene ends with another confrontation between Higgins and Eliza.
Higgins asks if Eliza is satisfied with the revenge she has brought thus far and if she will now come back, but she refuses.
Higgins defends himself from Eliza earlier accusation by arguing that he treats everyone the same, so she shouldn't feel singled out.
Eliza replies that she just wants little kindness, and that since he will never stop to show her this, she will not come back, but will marry Freddy.
Higgins scolds her for such low ambitions: he has made her "a consort for king."
When she threatens to teach phonetics and offer herself as an assistant to Nepommuck, Higgins again loses his temper and promises to wring her neck if she does so.
Eliza realises that this last threat strikes Higgins at the very core and that it gives her power over him; Higgins, for his part, is delighted to see spark of fight in Eliza rather than her erstwhile fretting and worrying.
He remarks "I like you like this", and calls her "pillar of strength".
Mrs. Higgins returns and she and Eliza depart for the wedding.
As they leave, Higgins incorrigibly gives Eliza number of errands to run, as though their recent conversation had not taken place.
Eliza disdainfully explains why they are unnecessary and wonders what Higgins is going to do without her (in another version, Eliza disdainfully tells him to do the errands himself; Mrs. Higgins says that she'll get the items, but Higgins cheerfully tells her that Eliza will do it after all).
Higgins laughs to himself at the idea of Eliza marrying Freddy as the play ends.
The play was well received by critics in major cities following its premieres in Vienna, London, and New York.
The initial release in Vienna garnered several reviews describing the show as positive departure from Shaw usual dry and didactic style.
The Broadway premiere in New York was praised in terms of both plot and acting, described as "a love story with brusque diffidence and wealth of humor.
Reviews of the production in London were slightly less unequivocally positive, with the Telegraph noting that the play was deeply diverting with interesting mechanical staging, although the critic ultimately found the production somewhat shallow and overly lengthy.
The London Times, however, praised both the characters and actors (especially Sir Herbert Tree as Higgins and Mrs. Patrick Campbell as Eliza) and the happy if "unconventional" ending.
Pygmalion was the most broadly appealing of all Shaw plays.
But popular audiences, looking for pleasant entertainment with big stars in West End venue, wanted "happy ending" for the characters they liked so well, as did some critics.
During the run, to Shaw exasperation but not to his surprise, Tree sought to sweeten Shaw ending to please himself and his record houses.
Shaw returned for the performance and watched Higgins, standing at the window, toss bouquet down to Eliza.
My ending makes money; you ought to be grateful," protested Tree, to which Shaw replied, "Your ending is damnable; you ought to be shot.
to the print edition for inclusion with subsequent editions, in which he explained precisely why it was impossible for the story to end with Higgins and Eliza getting married.
He continued to protect what he saw as the play, and Eliza, integrity by protecting the last scene.
For at least some performances during the revival, Shaw adjusted the ending in way that underscored the Shavian message.
In an undated note to Mrs. Campbell he wrote,
When Eliza emancipates herself when Galatea comes to life she must not relapse.
She must retain her pride and triumph to the end.
When Higgins takes your arm on 'consort battleship' you must instantly throw him off with implacable pride; and this is the note until the final 'Buy them yourself.'
He will go out on the balcony to watch your departure; come back triumphantly into the room; exclaim 'Galatea!'
meaning that the statue has come to life at last); and curtain.
Thus he gets the last word; and you get it too.
This ending, however, is not included in any print version of the play.)
Shaw fought against Higgins Eliza happy end pairing as late as .
He sent the film version producer, Gabriel Pascal, concluding sequence which he felt offered fair compromise: tender farewell scene between Higgins and Eliza, followed by one showing Freddy and Eliza happy in their greengrocery flower shop.
Only at the sneak preview did he learn that Pascal had finessed the question of Eliza future with slightly ambiguous final scene in which Eliza returns to the house of sadly musing Higgins and self mockingly quotes her previous self announcing, "I washed my face and hands before come, did".
First American (serialized) publication, Everybody Magazine, November
Different printed versions of the play omit or add certain lines.
The Project Gutenberg version published online, for instance, omits Higgins' famous declaration to Eliza, "Yes, you squashed cabbage leaf, you disgrace to the noble architecture of these columns, you incarnate insult to the English language!
I could pass you off as the Queen of Sheba!"
a line so famous that it is now retained in nearly all productions of the play, including the film version of Pygmalion as well as in the stage and film versions of My Fair Lady.
The co director of the film, Anthony Asquith, had seen Mrs. Campbell in the revival of Pygmalion and noticed that she spoke the line, "It my belief as how they done the old woman in."
He knew "as how" was not in Shaw text, but he felt it added color and rhythm to Eliza speech, and liked to think that Mrs. Campbell had ad libbed it herself.
Eighteen years later he added it to Wendy Hiller line in the film.
In the original play Eliza test is met at an ambassador garden party, offstage.
For the film Shaw and co writers replaced that exposition with scene at an embassy ball; Nepomuck, the blackmailing translator spoken about in the play, is finally seen, but his name is updated to Aristid Karpathy named so by Gabriel Pascal, the film Hungarian producer, who also made sure that Karpathy mistakes Eliza for Hungarian princess.
In My Fair Lady he became Zoltan Karpathy.
The change of name was likely to avoid offending the sensibilities of Roman Catholics, as St. John Nepomuk was, ironically, Catholic martyr who refused to divulge the secrets of the confessional.)
The film also introduced the famous pronunciation exercises "the rain in Spain stays mainly in the plain" and "In Hertford, Hereford, and Hampshire, hurricanes hardly ever happen".
Neither of these appears in the original play.
Shaw screen version of the play as well as new print version incorporating the new sequences he had added for the film script were published in .
The scenes he had noted in "Note for Technicians" are added.
Pygmalion remains Shaw most popular play.
The play widest audiences know it as the inspiration for the highly romanticized musical and film My Fair Lady.
Pygmalion has transcended cultural and language barriers since its first production.
The British Museum contains "images of the Polish production...; series of shots of wonderfully Gallicised Higgins and Eliza in the first French production in Paris in a fascinating set for Russian production of the .
There was no country which didn't have its own 'take' on the subjects of class division and social mobility, and it as enjoyable to view these subtle differences in settings and costumes as it is to imagine translators wracking their brains for their own equivalent of 'Not bloody likely'.
Joseph Weizenbaum named his chatterbot computer program ELIZA after the character Eliza Doolittle.
Peter Hogg novel Smilla Sense of Snow features "Professor Higgins" character i.e., skilled linguist able to deduce person geographical and social circumstances from hearing them speak; in that case, Hogg linguist is an expert on the Inuit languages and dialects of Greenland, but is equally at home in identifying at glance the various dialects and sociolects of Danish.
Lynn Fontanne as Eliza Doolittle in the Theatre Guild production of Pygmalion
Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree and Mrs Patrick Campbell at His Majesty Theatre
Philip Merivale and Mrs Patrick Campbell at three Broadway theatres (USA)
Aubrey Smith and Mrs Patrick Campbell at the Aldwych Theatre
Reginald Mason and Lynn Fontanne at the Guild Theatre (USA)
Ernest Thesiger and Wendy Hiller at the Festival Theatre, Malvern
Robert Morley and Diana Wynyard at the Old Vic Theatre
Raymond Massey and Gertrude Lawrence at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre (USA)
Alec Clunes and Brenda Bruce at the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith
John Clements and Kay Hammond at the St James Theatre
Ian White and Jane Asher at the Watford Palace Theatre
Alec McCowen and Diana Rigg at the Albery Theatre
Peter O'Toole and Jackie Smith Wood at the Shaftesbury Theatre
Peter O'Toole and Amanda Plummer at the Plymouth Theatre (USA)
Alan Howard and Frances Barber at the Royal National Theatre
Roy Marsden and Carli Norris (who replaced Emily Lloyd early in rehearsals) at the Albery Theatre
Tim Pigott Smith and Michelle Dockery at the Old Vic Theatre
Jefferson Mays and Claire Danes at American Airlines Theatre (USA)
Simon Robson and Cush Jumbo at the Royal Exchange Theatre, Manchester
Rupert Everett (later Alistair McGowan) and Kara Tointon at the Garrick Theatre
Risteárd Cooper and Charlie Murphy at the Abbey Theatre, Dublin
Emma Wright and Vitas Varnas at the New Theatre, Sydney (Australia)
Julie Andrews as flower girl Eliza Doolittle meets Rex Harrison as Professor Henry Higgins in the musical adaptation of Pygmalion, My Fair Lady.
My Fair Lady the Broadway musical by Lerner and Loewe (based on the film), starring Rex Harrison as Higgins and Julie Andrews as Eliza
Cinematographer Harry Stradling poses with Audrey Hepburn as Eliza Doolittle on the set of the movie musical My Fair Lady.
Pygmalion a German film adaptation by Shaw and others, starring Gustaf Gründgens as Higgins and Jenny Jugo as Eliza.
Pygmalion a Dutch film adaptation, starring Johan De Meester as Higgins and Lily Bouwmeester as Elisa.
Pygmalion a British film adaptation by Shaw and others, starring Leslie Howard as Higgins and Wendy Hiller as Eliza
Kitty a film based on the novel of the same name by Rosamond Marshall (published in ).
A broad interpretation of the Pygmalion story line, the film tells the rags to riches story of young guttersnipe, Cockney girl.
My Fair Lady a film version of the musical starring Audrey Hepburn as Eliza and Rex Harrison as Higgins
The Opening of Misty Beethoven an American hardcore pornography film take off starring Constance Money and Jamie Gillis
She All That a modern, teenage take on Pygmalion
The Duff based on the novel of the same name by Kody Keplinger, which in turn is modern teenage adaption of Pygmalion
A Hallmark Hall of Fame production of Pygmalion, starring Julie Harris as Eliza and James Donald as Higgins
Pygmalion a BBC Play of the Month version starring James Villiers as Higgins and Lynn Redgrave as Eliza
Pygmalion a film version starring Twiggy as Eliza and Robert Powell as Higgins
Pygmalion an adaptation starring Peter O'Toole as Higgins and Margot Kidder as Eliza
The Makeover, Hallmark Hall of Fame modern adaptation of Pygmalion, starring Julia Stiles and David Walton and directed by John Gray
Selfie, television sitcom on ABC, starring Karen Gillan and John Cho.
Classic Alice, webseries, aired episode adaptation on YouTube, starring Kate Hackett and Tony Noto in .
Totalmente Demais, Brazilian telenovela, starring Juliana Paes, Marina Ruy Barbosa and Fábio Assunção.
Pigmalió, an adaptation by Joan Oliver into Catalan.
Set in Barcelona, it was first staged in Sabadell in and has had other stagings since.
Ti Phulrani, an adaptation by Pu La Deshpande in Marathi.
The plot follows Pygmalion closely but the language features are based on Marathi.
Santu Rangeeli, an adaptation by Madhu Rye and Pravin Joshi in Gujarati.
A television play in Polish, translated by Kazimierz Piotrowski, directed by Maciej Wojtyszko and performed at Teatr Telewizji (Polish Television studio in Warsaw) by some of the top Polish actors at the time.
It has been aired on national TV numerous times since its TV premiere in .
A adaptation by Aka Morchiladze and Levan Tsuladze in Georgian performed at the Marjanishvili Theatre in Tbilisi
Man Pasand, Hindi movie directed by Basu Chatterjee
Ogo Bodhu Shundori, Bengali comedy film starring Uttam Kumar directed by Salil Dutta
My Young Auntie, Hong Kong action film directed by Lau Kar Leung
Laiza Porko Sushi, Papiamentu adaptation from writer and artist May Henriquez
Gönülcelen, Turkish series starring Tuba Büyüküstün and Cansel Elcin
Δύο Ξένοι, Greek series starring Nikos Sergianopoulos and Evelina Papoulia
Hoi Polloi a film adaptation by The Three Stooges.
Willy Russell stage comedy Educating Rita and the subsequent film adaptation are similar in plot to Pygmalion.
The First Night of Pygmalion a play depicting the backstage tensions during the first British production.
Trading Places a film starring Eddie Murphy and Dan Aykroyd.
Pretty Woman a film starring Julia Roberts and Richard Gere.
Confessions of Teenage Drama Queen a film starring Lindsay Lohan where she auditions for modernized musical version of Pygmalion called "Eliza Rocks".
Moonlighting second season episode "My Fair David" is inspired by the movie My Fair Lady, in plot where Maddie Hayes makes bet with David Addison consisting in making him softer and more serious with work.
She is her Henry Higgins, while he is put in the Eliza Doolittle position, as the funny, clumsy, bad mannered part of the relationship.
s third season episode "The Galatea Affair" is spoof of My Fair Lady.
A crude barroom entertainer (Joan Collins) is taught to behave like lady.
Noel Harrison, son of Rex Harrison, star of the My Fair Lady film, is the guest star.
In The Beverly Hillbillies episode "Pygmalion and Elly" Sonny resumes his high class courtship of Elly May by playing Julius Caesar and Pygmalion.
In The Andy Griffith Show season episode "My Fair Ernest T. Bass", Andy and Barney attempt to turn the mannerless Ernest T. Bass into presentable gentleman.
References to "Pygmalion" abound: Bass' manners are tested at social gathering, where he is assumed by the hostess to be man from Boston.
Several characters comment "if you wrote this into play nobody'd believe it."
In Doctor Who, the character of Leela is loosely based on Eliza Doolittle.
She was regular in the programme from to and later reprised in audio dramas from to present.
In Ghost Light, the character of Control is heavily based upon Eliza Doolittle, with Redvers Fenn Cooper in similar role as Henry Higgins; the story also features reference to the "Rain in Spain" rhyme and the Doctor referring to companion Ace as "Eliza".
In the Remington Steele season episode "My Fair Steele", Laura and Steele transform truck stop waitress into socialite to flush out kidnapper.
Steele references the movie Pygmalion and My Fair Lady, and references the way in which Laura has "molded" him into her fictional creation.
episode "Professor Jonathan Higgins" of Season Jonathan Higgins tries to turn his punk rocker cousin into high society socialite.
Higgins even references Pygmalion in the episode.
The Family Guy episode "One If By Clam, Two If By Sea" involves subplot with Stewie trying to refine Eliza Pinchley, his new Cockney accented neighbor, into proper young lady.
He makes bet with Brian that he can improve Eliza vocabulary and get her to speak without her accent before her birthday party.
Includes "The Life of the Wife", parody of the song "The Rain in Spain" (from My Fair Lady).
The voice of Stewie was in fact originally based on that of Rex Harrison.
The plot of the Star Trek: Voyager episode "Someone to Watch Over Me" is loosely based on Pygmalion.
Pygmalion is the inspiration for The Simpsons episode entitled "Pygmoelian," in which infamously ugly character Moe, of Moe Tavern, has facelift.
It was also parodied to heavier extent in the episode "My Fair Laddy", where the character being changed is uncouth Scotsman Groundskeeper Willie.
In the Boy Meets World episode "Turnaround", Cory and Shawn learn about "Pygmalion" in class, paralleling their attempt with Cory uncool date to the dance.
The iCarly episode "iMake Sam Girlier" is loosely based on Pygmalion.
The Season King of the Hill episode "Pigmalian" describes an unhinged local pig magnate who attempts to transform Luanne into the idealized woman of his company old advertisements.
In The King of Queens episode "Gambling N'Diction" Carrie tries to lose her accent for job promotion by being taught by Spence.
The episode was renamed to "Carrie Doolittle" in Germany.
In ABC debuted romantic situational comedy titled Selfie, starring Karen Gillan and John Cho.
It is modern day adaptation that revolves around an image obsessed woman named Eliza Dooley (Gillan) who comes under the social guidance of marketing image guru Henry Higgs (Cho).
In the Malaysian drama Nur, Pygmalion themes are evident.
The lives of pious, upstanding man and prostitute are considered within the context of Islam, societal expectations and norms.
