Anna Karenina (Russian: «Анна Каренина», IPA: is novel by the Russian author Leo Tolstoy, first published in book form in .
Many authors consider Anna Karenina the greatest work of literature ever written, and Tolstoy himself called it his first true novel.
It was initially released in serial installments from to in the periodical The Russian Messenger.
A complex novel in eight parts, with more than dozen major characters, it is spread over more than pages (depending on the translation), typically contained in two volumes.
It deals with themes of betrayal, faith, family, marriage, Imperial Russian society, desire, and rural vs. city life.
The plot centers on an extramarital affair between Anna and dashing cavalry officer Count Alexei Kirillovich Vronsky that scandalizes the social circles of Saint Petersburg and forces the young lovers to flee for Italy in futile search for happiness.
Returning to Russia, their lives further unravel.
Trains are recurring motif throughout the novel, which takes place against the backdrop of rapid transformations as result of the liberal reforms initiated by Emperor Alexander II of Russia, with several major plot points taking place either on passenger trains or at stations in Saint Petersburg or elsewhere in Russia.
The novel has been adapted into various media including opera, film, television, ballet, figure skating and radio drama.
The first of many film adaptations was released in but has not survived.
Countess Anna Arkadyevna Karenina (Анна Аркадьевна Каренина): Stepan Oblonsky sister, Karenin wife and Vronsky lover.
Count Alexei Kirillovich Vronsky (Алексей Кириллович Вронский): Lover of Anna, cavalry officer
Prince Stepan "Stiva" Arkadyevich Oblonsky (Степан "Стива" Аркадьевич Облонский): civil servant and Anna brother, man about town, .
His nickname is Russianized form of Steve.
Princess Darya "Dolly" Alexandrovna Oblonskaya (Дарья "Долли" Александровна Облонская): Stepan wife,
Count Alexei Alexandrovich Karenin (Алексей Александрович Каренин): senior statesman and Anna husband, twenty years her senior.
Konstantin "Kostya" Dmitrievich Lëvin/Lyovin (Константин Дмитриевич Лёвин): Kitty suitor, old friend of Stiva, landowner, .
Nikolai Dmitrievich Lëvin/Lyovin (Николай Дмитриевич Лёвин): Konstantin elder brother, an impoverished alcoholic.
Sergei Ivanovich Koznyshev (Сергей Иванович Кознышев): Konstantin half brother, celebrated writer, .
Princess Ekaterina "Kitty" Alexandrovna Shcherbatskaya (Екатерина Александровна Щербацкая): Dolly younger sister and later Levin wife, .
Princess Elizaveta "Betsy" Tverskaya (Елизавета "Бетси" Тверская): Anna wealthy, morally loose society friend and Vronsky cousin
Countess Lidia Ivanovna (Лидия Ивановна): Leader of high society circle that includes Karenin, and shuns Princess Betsy and her circle.
She maintains an interest in the Russian Orthodox mystical and spiritual
Sergei "Seryozha" Alexeyich Karenin (Сергей "Серёжа" Каренин): Anna and Karenin son, .
Anna "Annie": Anna and Vronsky daughter.
Anna Karenina is the tragic story of Countess Anna Karenina, married noblewoman and socialite, and her affair with the affluent Count Vronsky.
The story starts when she arrives in the midst of family broken up by her brother unbridled womanizing—something that prefigures her own later situation, though she would experience less tolerance by others.
A bachelor, Vronsky is eager to marry Anna if she will agree to leave her husband Count Karenin, senior government official, but she is vulnerable to the pressures of Russian social norms, the moral laws of the Russian Orthodox Church, her own insecurities, and Karenin indecision.
Although Vronsky and Anna go to Italy, where they can be together, they have trouble making friends.
Back in Russia, she is shunned, becoming further isolated and anxious, while Vronsky pursues his social life.
Despite Vronsky reassurances, she grows increasingly possessive and paranoid about his imagined infidelity, fearing loss of control.
A parallel story within the novel is that of Konstantin Lëvin or Ljovin, wealthy country landowner who wants to marry Princess Kitty, sister to Princess Dolly and sister in law to Anna brother Prince Oblonsky.
Konstantin has to propose twice before Kitty accepts.
The novel details Konstantin difficulties managing his estate, his eventual marriage, and his struggle to accept the Christian faith, until the birth of his first child.
The novel explores diverse range of topics throughout its approximately one thousand pages.
Some of these topics include an evaluation of the feudal system that existed in Russia at the time—politics, not only in the Russian government but also at the level of the individual characters and families, religion, morality, gender and social class.
The novel is divided into eight parts.
Its epigraph is Vengeance is mine; will repay, from Romans which in turn quotes from Deuteronomy :.
The novel begins with one of its most often quoted lines:
Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.
Tatiana Samoilova as Anna in the Soviet screen version of Tolstoy novel
The novel opens with scene that introduces Prince Stepan Arkadyevich Oblonsky ("Stiva"), Moscow aristocrat and civil servant who has been unfaithful to his wife, Princess Darya Alexandrovna ("Dolly").
Dolly has discovered his affair with the family governess, and the household and family are in turmoil.
Stiva informs the household that his married sister, Countess Anna Arkadyevna Karenina, is coming to visit from Saint Petersburg in bid to calm the situation.
Meanwhile, Stiva childhood friend, Konstantin Dmitrievich Levin ("Kostya"), arrives in Moscow with the aim of proposing to Dolly youngest sister, Princess Katerina Alexandrovna Shcherbatskaya ("Kitty").
Levin is passionate, restless, but shy aristocratic landowner who, unlike his Moscow friends, chooses to live in the country on his large estate.
He discovers that Kitty is also being pursued by Count Alexei Kirillovich Vronsky, an army officer.
Whilst at the railway station to meet Anna, Stiva bumps into Vronsky who is there to meet his mother, the Countess Vronskaya.
Anna and Vronskaya have traveled and talked together in the same carriage.
As the family members are reunited, and Vronsky sees Anna for the first time, railway worker accidentally falls in front of train and is killed.
Anna interprets this as an "evil omen."
Vronsky, however, is infatuated with her.
Anna is uneasy about leaving her young son, Sergei ("Seryozha"), alone for the first time.
At the Oblonsky home, Anna talks openly and emotionally to Dolly about Stiva affair and convinces her that Stiva still loves her despite the infidelity.
Dolly is moved by Anna speeches and decides to forgive Stiva.
Kitty, who comes to visit Dolly and Anna, is just eighteen.
In her first season as debutante, she is expected to make an excellent match with man of her social standing.
Vronsky has been paying her considerable attention, and she expects to dance with him at ball that evening.
Kitty is very struck by Anna beauty and personality and becomes infatuated with her just as Vronsky.
When Levin proposes to Kitty at her home, she clumsily turns him down, believing she is in love with Vronsky and that he will propose to her, and encouraged to do so by her mother who believes Vronsky would be better match (in contrast to Kitty father, who favors Levin).
At the big ball Kitty expects to hear something definitive from Vronsky, but he dances with Anna instead, choosing her as partner over shocked and heartbroken Kitty.
Kitty realizes that Vronsky has fallen in love with Anna and has no intention of marrying her, despite his overt flirtations.
Vronsky has regarded his interactions with Kitty merely as source of amusement and assumes that Kitty has acted for the same reasons.
Anna, shaken by her emotional and physical response to Vronsky, returns at once to St. Petersburg.
Vronsky travels on the same train.
During the overnight journey, the two meet and Vronsky confesses his love.
Anna refuses him, although she is deeply affected by his attentions to her.
Levin, crushed by Kitty refusal, returns to his estate, abandoning any hope of marriage.
Anna returns to her husband, Count Alexei Alexandrovich Karenin, senior government official, and her son, Seryozha, in St. Petersburg.
On seeing her husband for the first time since her encounter with Vronsky, Anna realizes that she finds him unattractive, though she tells herself he is good man.
The Shcherbatskys consult doctors over Kitty health, which has been failing since Vronsky rejection.
A specialist advises that Kitty should go abroad to health spa to recover.
Dolly speaks to Kitty and understands she is suffering because of Vronsky and Levin, whom she cares for and had hurt in vain.
Kitty, humiliated by Vronsky and tormented by her rejection of Levin, upsets her sister by referring to Stiva infidelity, saying she could never love man who betrayed her.
Meanwhile, Stiva visits Levin on his country estate while selling nearby plot of land.
In St. Petersburg, Anna begins to spend more time in the inner circle of Princess Elizaveta ("Betsy"), fashionable socialite and Vronsky cousin.
Although she initially tries to reject him, she eventually succumbs to his attentions.
Karenin reminds his wife of the impropriety of paying too much attention to Vronsky in public, which is becoming the subject of gossip.
He is concerned about the couple public image, although he believes that Anna is above suspicion.
Vronsky, keen horseman, takes part in steeplechase event, during which he rides his mare Frou Frou too hard—his irresponsibility causing him to fall and break the horse back.
Anna is unable to hide her distress during the accident.
Before this, Anna had told Vronsky that she is pregnant with his child.
Karenin is also present at the races and remarks to Anna that her behaviour is improper.
Anna, in state of extreme distress and emotion, confesses her affair to her husband.
Karenin asks her to break it off to avoid further gossip, believing that their marriage will be preserved.
Kitty and her mother travel to German spa to recover from her ill health.
There, they meet the wheelchair bound Pietist Madame Stahl and the saintly Varenka, her adopted daughter.
Influenced by Varenka, Kitty becomes extremely pious, but becomes disillusioned by her father criticism when she learns Madame Stahl is faking her illness.
Portrait of young lady (so called Anna Karenina) by Aleksei Mikhailovich Kolesov, National Museum in Warsaw
Levin continues working on his estate, setting closely tied to his spiritual thoughts and struggles.
He wrestles with the idea of falseness, wondering how he should go about ridding himself of it, and criticising what he feels is falseness in others.
He develops ideas relating to agriculture, and the unique relationship between the agricultural labourer and his native land and culture.
He comes to believe that the agricultural reforms of Europe will not work in Russia because of the unique culture and personality of the Russian peasant.
When Levin visits Dolly, she attempts to understand what happened between him and Kitty and to explain Kitty behaviour.
Levin is very agitated by Dolly talk about Kitty, and he begins to feel distant from Dolly as he perceives her loving behaviour towards her children as false.
Levin resolves to forget Kitty and contemplates the possibility of marriage to peasant woman.
However, chance sighting of Kitty in her carriage makes Levin realize he still loves her.
Meanwhile, in St. Petersburg, Karenin refuses to separate from Anna, insisting that their relationship will continue.
He threatens to take away Seryozha if she persists in her affair with Vronsky.
When Anna and Vronsky continue seeing each other, Karenin consults with lawyer about obtaining divorce.
During the time period, divorce in Russia could only be requested by the innocent party in an affair and required either that the guilty party confessed—which would ruin Anna position in society and bar her from remarrying in the Orthodox Church—or that the guilty party be discovered in the act of adultery.
Karenin forces Anna to hand over some of Vronsky love letters, which the lawyer deems insufficient as proof of the affair.
Stiva and Dolly argue against Karenin drive for divorce.
Karenin changes his plans after hearing that Anna is dying after the difficult birth of her daughter, Annie.
At her bedside, Karenin forgives Vronsky.
However, Vronsky, embarrassed by Karenin magnanimity, unsuccessfully attempts suicide by shooting himself.
As Anna recovers, she finds that she cannot bear living with Karenin despite his forgiveness and his attachment to Annie.
When she hears that Vronsky is about to leave for military posting in Tashkent, she becomes desperate.
Anna and Vronsky reunite and elope to Europe, leaving Seryozha and Karenin offer of divorce.
Meanwhile, Stiva acts as matchmaker with Levin: he arranges meeting between him and Kitty, which results in their reconciliation and betrothal.
Levin and Kitty marry and start their new life on his country estate.
Although the couple are happy, they undergo bitter and stressful first three months of marriage.
Levin feels dissatisfied at the amount of time Kitty wants to spend with him and dwells on his inability to be as productive as he was as bachelor.
When the marriage starts to improve, Levin learns that his brother, Nikolai, is dying of consumption.
Kitty offers to accompany Levin on his journey to see Nikolai and proves herself great help in nursing Nikolai.
Seeing his wife take charge of the situation in an infinitely more capable manner than he could have done himself without her, Levin love for Kitty grows.
Kitty eventually learns that she is pregnant.
In Europe, Vronsky and Anna struggle to find friends who will accept them.
Whilst Anna is happy to be finally alone with Vronsky, he feels suffocated.
They cannot socialize with Russians of their own class and find it difficult to amuse themselves.
Vronsky, who believed that being with Anna was the key to his happiness, finds himself increasingly bored and unsatisfied.
He takes up painting and makes an attempt to patronize an émigré Russian artist of genius.
However, Vronsky cannot see that his own art lacks talent and passion, and that his conversation about art is extremely pretentious.
Increasingly restless, Anna and Vronsky decide to return to Russia.
In St. Petersburg, Anna and Vronsky stay in one of the best hotels, but take separate suites.
It becomes clear that whilst Vronsky is still able to move freely in Russian society, Anna is barred from it.
Even her old friend, Princess Betsy, who has had affairs herself, evades her company.
Anna starts to become anxious that Vronsky no longer loves her.
Meanwhile, Karenin is comforted by Countess Lidia Ivanovna, an enthusiast of religious and mystic ideas fashionable with the upper classes.
She advises him to keep Seryozha away from Anna and to tell him his mother is dead.
However, Seryozha refuses to believe that this is true.
Anna visits Seryozha uninvited on his ninth birthday but is discovered by Karenin.
Anna, desperate to regain at least some of her former position in society, attends show at the theatre at which all of St. Petersburg high society are present.
Vronsky begs her not to go, but he is unable to bring himself to explain to her why she cannot attend.
At the theatre, Anna is openly snubbed by her former friends, one of whom makes deliberate scene and leaves the theatre.
Unable to find place for themselves in St. Petersburg, Anna and Vronsky leave for Vronsky own country estate.
Dolly, her mother the Princess Scherbatskaya, and Dolly children spend the summer with Levin and Kitty.
The Levins' life is simple and unaffected, although Levin is uneasy at the "invasion" of so many Scherbatskys.
He becomes extremely jealous when one of the visitors, Veslovsky, flirts openly with the pregnant Kitty.
Levin tries to overcome his jealousy, and briefly succeeds during hunt with Veslovsky and Oblonsky, but eventually succumbs to his feelings and orders Veslovsky to leave in an embarrassing scene.
Veslovsky immediately goes to stay with Anna and Vronsky at their nearby estate.
When Dolly visits Anna, she is struck by the difference between the Levins' aristocratic yet simple home life and Vronsky overtly luxurious and lavish country estate.
She is also unable to keep pace with Anna fashionable dresses or Vronsky extravagant spending on hospital he is building.
In addition, all is not quite well with Anna and Vronsky.
Dolly notices Anna anxious behaviour and her uncomfortable flirtations with Veslovsky.
Vronsky makes an emotional request to Dolly, asking her to convince Anna to divorce Karenin so that the two might marry and live normally.
Anna has become intensely jealous of Vronsky and cannot bear it when he leaves her even for short excursions.
When Vronsky leaves for several days of provincial elections, Anna becomes convinced that she must marry him to prevent him from leaving her.
After Anna writes to Karenin, she and Vronsky leave the countryside for Moscow.
While visiting Moscow for Kitty confinement, Levin quickly gets used to the city fast paced, expensive and frivolous society life.
He accompanies Stiva to gentleman club, where the two meet Vronsky.
Levin and Stiva pay visit to Anna, who is occupying her empty days by being patroness to an orphaned English girl.
Levin is initially uneasy about the visit, but Anna easily puts him under her spell.
When he admits to Kitty that he has visited Anna, she accuses him of falling in love with her.
The couple are later reconciled, realising that Moscow society life has had negative, corrupting effect on Levin.
Anna cannot understand why she can attract man like Levin, who has young and beautiful new wife, but can no longer attract Vronsky.
Her relationship with Vronsky is under increasing strain, because he can move freely in Russian society while she remains excluded.
Her increasing bitterness, boredom, and jealousy cause the couple to argue.
Anna uses morphine to help her sleep, habit she began while living with Vronsky at his country estate.
She has become dependent on it.
Meanwhile, after long and difficult labour, Kitty gives birth to son, Dmitri, nicknamed "Mitya".
Levin is both horrified and profoundly moved by the sight of the tiny, helpless baby.
Stiva visits Karenin to seek his commendation for new post.
During the visit, Stiva asks Karenin to grant Anna divorce (which would require him to confess to non existent affair), but Karenin decisions are now governed by French "clairvoyant" recommended by Lidia Ivanovna.
The clairvoyant apparently had vision in his sleep during Stiva visit and gives Karenin cryptic message that he interprets in way such that he must decline the request for divorce.
Anna becomes increasingly jealous and irrational towards Vronsky, whom she suspects of having love affairs with other women.
She is also convinced that he will give in to his mother plans to marry him off to rich society woman.
They have bitter row and Anna believes the relationship is over.
She starts to think of suicide as an escape from her torments.
In her mental and emotional confusion, she sends telegram to Vronsky asking him to come home to her, and then pays visit to Dolly and Kitty.
Anna confusion and anger overcome her and, in parallel to the railway worker accidental death in Part she commits suicide by throwing herself under the carriage of passing train.
Sergei Ivanovich (Levin brother) latest book is ignored by readers and critics and he joins the new pan Slavic movement.
Stiva gets the post he desired so much, and Karenin takes custody of Vronsky and Anna baby, Annie.
A group of Russian volunteers, including the suicidal Vronsky, depart from Russia to fight in the Orthodox Serbian revolt that has broken out against the Turks.
A lightning storm occurs at Levin estate while his wife and newborn son are outdoors and, in his fear for their safety, Levin realizes that he does indeed love his son as much as he loves Kitty.
Kitty family is concerned that man as altruistic as her husband does not consider himself to be Christian.
After speaking at length to peasant, Levin has true change of heart, concluding that he does believe in the Christian principles taught to him in childhood and no longer questions his faith.
He realizes that one must decide for oneself what is acceptable concerning one own faith and beliefs.
He chooses not to tell Kitty of the change that he has undergone.
Levin is initially displeased that his return to his faith does not bring with it complete transformation to righteousness.
However, at the end of the story, Levin arrives at the conclusion that despite his newly accepted beliefs, he is human and will go on making mistakes.
His life can now be meaningfully and truthfully oriented toward righteousness.
Tolstoy style in Anna Karenina is considered by many critics to be transitional, forming bridge between the realist and modernist novel.
According to Ruth Benson in her book about Tolstoy heroines, Tolstoy diaries show how displeased he was with his style and approach to writing in early drafts of Anna Karenina, quoting him as stating, "I loathe what have written.
The galleys of Anna Karenina for the April issue of Russkij Vestnik now lie on my table, and really don't have the heart to correct them.
Everything in them is so rotten, and the whole thing should be rewritten—all that has been printed too—scrapped, and melted down, thrown away, renounced JI )".
Anna Karenina is commonly thought to explore the themes of hypocrisy, jealousy, faith, fidelity, family, marriage, society, progress, carnal desire and passion, and the agrarian connection to land in contrast to the lifestyles of the city.
Translator Rosemary Edmonds wrote that Tolstoy does not explicitly moralise in the book, but instead allows his themes to emerge naturally from the "vast panorama of Russian life."
She also says one of the novel key messages is that "no one may build their happiness on another pain.
Levin is often considered semi autobiographical portrayal of Tolstoy own beliefs, struggles, and life events.
Tolstoy first name is "Lev," and the Russian surname "Levin" means "of Lev."
According to footnotes in the Pevear/Volokhonsky translation, the viewpoints Levin supports throughout the novel in his arguments match Tolstoy outspoken views on the same issues.
Moreover, according to W. Gareth Jones, Levin proposed to Kitty in the same way as Tolstoy to Sophia Behrs.
Additionally, Levin request that his fiancée read his diary as way of disclosing his faults and previous sexual encounters parallels Tolstoy own requests to his fiancée, Sophia Behrs.
The events in the novel take place against the backdrop of rapid transformations as result of the liberal reforms initiated by Emperor Alexander II of Russia, principal among these the Emancipation reform of followed by judicial reform, including jury system; military reforms, the introduction of elected local governments (Zemstvo), the fast development of railroads, banks, industry, telegraph, the rise of new business elites and the decline of the old landed aristocracy, freer press, the awakening of public opinion, the Pan Slavism movement, the woman question, volunteering to aid Serbia in its military conflict with the Ottoman Empire in etc.
These contemporary developments are hotly debated by the characters in the novel.
The suburban railway station of Obiralovka, where one of the characters commits suicide, is now known as the town of Zheleznodorozhny, Moscow Oblast.
Anna Karénina, Translated by Nathan Haskell Dole (Thomas Y. Crowell Co., New York, Walter Scott Publishing Company Ltd., London, )
Anna Karenin, Translated by Constance Garnett.
Revised by Leonard J. Kent and Nina Berberova (New York: Random House, ).
Revised version reprinted by Modern Library.
Anna Karenina, Translated by Louise and Aylmer Maude (Oxford University Press, Oxford, )
Anna Karenin, Translated by Rosemary Edmonds (Penguin Classics, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, )
Anna Karenina, Translated by Joel Carmichael (Bantam Books, New York, )
Anna Karenina, Translated by David Magarshack (A Signet Classic, New American Library, New York and Scarborough, Ontario, )
Anna Karénina, Translated by Margaret Wettlin (Progress Publishers, )
Anna Karenina, Translated by Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky (Allen Lane/Penguin, London, )
Anna Karenina, Translated by Kyril Zinovieff and Jenny Hughes (Oneworld Classics ISBN
Anna Karenina, Translated by Rosamund Bartlett (Oxford University Press)
Anna Karenina, Translated by Marian Schwartz (Yale University Press)
Writing in the year academic Zoja Pavlovskis Petit compared the different translations of Anna Karenina on the market.
Commenting on the revision of Constance Garnett translation she says: "The revision by Kent Berberova (the latter no mean stylist herself) succeeds in 'correcting errors tightening the prose, converting Briticisms, and casting light on areas Mrs Garnett did not explore'.
Their edition shows an excellent understanding of the details of Tolstoy world (for instance, the fact that the elaborate coiffure Kitty wears to the ball is not her own hair—a detail that eludes most other translators), and at the same time they use English imaginatively (Kitty shoes 'delighted her feet' rather than eemed to make her feet lighter'—Maude; paraphrase).
the purist will be pleased to see Kent Berberova give all the Russian names in full, as used by the author; any reader will be grateful for the footnotes that elucidate anything not immediately accessible to someone not well acquainted with imperial Russia.
This emended Garnett should probably be reader first choice."
She further comments on the Maudes' translation: "the revised Garnett and the Magarshack versions do better justice to the original, but still, the World Classics edition offers very full List of Characters and good notes based on the Maudes'."
On Edmonds translation she states: has the advantage of solid scholarship ...
Yet she lacks true sensitivity for the language missing many subtlety."
On Carmichael version she comments: "this is a—rather breezily—readable translation but there are errors and misunderstandings, as well as clumsiness."
On Magarshack translation she comments: offers natural, simple, and direct English prose that is appropriate to Tolstoy Russian.
There is occasional awkwardness and imprecision but Magarshack understands the text and even when unable to translate an idiom closely he renders its real meaning ...
On Wettlin Soviet version she writes: "steady but uninspired, and sounds like English prose written by Russian who knows the language but is not completely at home in it.
The advantage is that Wettlin misses hardly any cultural detail.
In In Quest Of Tolstoy Hughes McLean devotes full chapter ("Which English Anna?")
comparing different translations of Anna Karenina.
translation, while perfectly adequate, is in my view not consistently or unequivocally superior to others in the market.
He states his recommendations in the last two pages of the survey: "None of the existing translations is actively bad One choice must therefore be based on nuances, subtleties, and refinements.
He eliminates the Maudes for "disturbing errors" and "did not find either the Margashack or Carmichael ever superior to the others, and the lack of notes is drawback."
On Edmonds version he states: "her version has no notes at all and all too frequently errs in the direction of making Tolstoy 'robust awkwardness' conform to the translator notion of good English style.
McLean recommendations are the Kent–Berberova revision of Garnett translation and the Pevear and Volokhonsky version.
I consider the GKB very good version, even though it is based on an out of date Russian text.
Kent and Berberova did much more thorough and careful revision of Garnett translation than Gibian did of the Maude one, and they have supplied fairly full notes, conveniently printed at the bottom of the page.
McLean takes Pevear and Volokhonsky to task for not using the best critical text (the "Zaidenshnur–Zhdanov text") and offering flawed notes without consulting C.J.
Turner Karenina Companion although he calls their version "certainly good translation.
Reviewing the translations by Bartlett and Schwartz for The New York Times Book Review, Masha Gessen noted that each new translation of Anna Karenina ended up highlighting an aspect of Tolstoy "variable voice" in the novel, and thus, "The Tolstoy of Garnett... is monocled British gentleman who is simply incapable of taking his characters as seriously as they take themselves.
Pevear and Volokhonsky... created reasonable, calm storyteller who communicated in conversational American English.
Rosamund Bartlett... creates an updated ironic Brit version of Tolstoy.
Marian Schwartz... has produced what is probably the least smooth talking and most contradictory Tolstoy yet."
Gessen found Schwartz translation to be formally closer to the original Russian, but often weighed down with details as result; Bartlett translation, like Pevear and Volokhonsky, was rendered in more idiomatic English and more readable.
Main article: Eastern Slavic naming customs
The title has been translated as both Anna Karenin and Anna Karenina.
The first instance "naturalizes" the Russian name into English, whereas the second is direct transliteration of the actual Russian name.
Vladimir Nabokov explains: "In Russian, surname ending in consonant acquires final 'a' (except for the cases of such names that cannot be declined and except adjectives like OblonskAYA) when designating woman; but only when the reference is to female stage performer should English feminise Russian surname (following French custom: la Pavlova, 'the Pavlova').
Ivanov and Karenin wives are Mrs Ivanov and Mrs Karenin in Britain and the US—not 'Mrs Ivanova' or 'Mrs Karenina'.
Nabokov favours the first convention—removing the Russian 'a' to naturalize the name into English—but subsequent translators mostly allow Anna actual Russian name to stand.
Larissa Volokhonsky, herself Russian, prefers the second option, as did Aylmer and Louise Maude, who lived in Russia for many years and were friends of Tolstoy.
Other translators, like Constance Garnett and Rosemary Edmonds, both non Russians, prefer the first.
Main article: Adaptations of Anna Karenina
The novel has been adapted into various media including opera, film, television, ballet, and radio drama.
The first film adaptation was released in but has not survived.
Anna Karenine film), Russian adaptation directed by Maurice André Maître.
Anna Karenina film), Russian adaptation directed by Vladimir Gardin
Anna Karenina film), an American version starring Danish actress Betty Nansen
Anna Karenina film), Hungarian adaptation starring Irén Varsányi as Anna Karenina
Love film), an American version, starring Greta Garbo and directed by Edmund Goulding.
This version featured significant changes from the novel and had two different endings, with happy one for American audiences
Anna Karenina film), starring Greta Garbo and Fredric March; directed by Clarence Brown
Anna Karenina film) starring Vivien Leigh and Ralph Richardson; directed by Julien Duvivier
Anna Karenina film), Russian version directed by Tatyana Lukashevich
Nahr al Hob (River of Love), an Egyptian movie directed by Ezzel Dine Zulficar
Anna Karenina film), Russian version directed by Alexander Zarkhi
Anna Karenina, ten episode BBC series, directed by Basil Coleman and starred Nicola Pagett, Eric Porter and Stuart Wilson.
Anna Karenina film), film of the Bolshoi Ballet production, directed by Margarita Pilikhina, first released in Finland in .
Anna Karenina film), TV Movie starring Jacqueline Bisset and Christopher Reeve, directed by Simon Langton
Anna Karenina film), the first American version filmed entirely in Russia, directed by Bernard Rose and starring Sophie Marceau and Sean Bean
Anna Karenina miniseries), British version by David Blair and starring Helen McCrory and Kevin McKidd
Anna Karenina film), British version by Joe Wright from screenplay by Tom Stoppard, starring Keira Knightley and Jude Law
Anna Karenina film), an English language Italian/French/Spanish/German/Lithuanian TV co production by Christian Duguay and starring Vittoria Puccini, Benjamin Sadler and Santiago Cabrera.
Alternatively presented as two part mini series or single hours and minutes film.
The Beautiful Lie miniseries), an Australian contemporary re imagining of Anna Karenina, by Glendyn Ivin (director) and Peter Salmon (director) starring Sarah Snook, Roger Corser, Benedict Samuel, Sophie Lowe
Helen Edmundson adapted Anna Karenina for production by Shared Experience which toured around the UK and internationally; Edmundson won UK Theatre Award.
Anna Karenina, Russian ballet choreographed by Boris Eifman, with music by Tchaikovsky.
Anna Karenina, choreography by Yuri Possokhov, with music from Ilya Demutsky.
The MGM Theater of the Air, starring Marlene Dietrich and directed by Marx Loeb
