For other uses, see Secret Garden.
The Secret Garden Front cover of the US editionAuthorFrances Hodgson BurnettIllustratorM.
L. Kirk (US) Charles Robinson (UK)
The Secret Garden is novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett first published in book form in following the publication in of serial version in US magazine.
Set in England, it is one of Burnett most popular novels and is considered classic of English children literature.
Several stage and film adaptations have been made.
The American edition was published by Stokes with illustrations by Maria Louise Kirk (signed as M. L. Kirk) and the British edition by Heinemann with illustrations by Charles Heath Robinson.
Great Maytham Hall Garden, Kent, England.
At the turn of the century, Mary Lennox is sickly and unloved year old girl, born in India to wealthy British parents who never wanted her and make an effort to ignore the girl.
She is cared for by servants, who allow her to become spoiled, aggressive, and selfish child.
After cholera epidemic kills her parents and the servants, Mary is discovered alive but alone in the empty house.
She briefly lives with an English clergyman and his family in India before she is sent to Yorkshire, in England, to live with Archibald Craven, wealthy uncle whom she has never met, at his isolated house, Misselthwaite Manor.
At first, Mary is as rude and sour as ever.
She dislikes her new home, the people living in it, and most of all, the bleak moor on which it sits.
However, good natured maid named Martha Sowerby tells Mary about the late Mrs Craven, who would spend hours in private walled garden growing roses.
Mrs Craven died after an accident in the garden, and the devastated Mr. Craven locked the garden and buried the key.
Mary becomes interested in finding the secret garden herself, and her ill manners begin to soften as result.
Soon she comes to enjoy the company of Martha, the gardener Ben Weatherstaff, and friendly robin redbreast.
Her health and attitude improve, and she grows stronger as she explores the moor and plays with skipping rope that Mrs Sowerby buys for her.
Mary wonders about both the secret garden and the mysterious cries that echo through the house at night.
As Mary explores the gardens, her robin draws her attention to an area of disturbed soil.
Here Mary finds the key to the locked garden and eventually the door to the garden itself.
She asks Martha for garden tools, which Martha sends with Dickon, her year old brother.
Mary and Dickon take liking to each other, as Dickon has kind way with animals and good nature.
Eager to absorb his gardening knowledge, Mary tells him about the secret garden.
One night, Mary hears the cries once more and decides to follow them through the house.
She is startled when she finds boy her age named Colin, who lives in hidden bedroom.
She soon discovers that they are cousins, Colin being the son of Mr and Mrs Craven, and that he suffers from an unspecified spinal problem which precludes him from walking and causes him to spend most of his time in bed.
Mary visits him every day that week, distracting him from his troubles with stories of the moor, Dickon and his animals, and the secret garden.
Mary finally confides that she has access to the secret garden, and Colin asks to see it.
Colin is put into his wheelchair and brought outside into the secret garden.
It is the first time he has been outdoors for years.
While in the garden, the children look up to see Ben Weatherstaff looking over the wall on ladder.
Startled and angry to find the children in the secret garden, he admits that he believed Colin to be cripple.
Colin stands up from his chair and finds that his legs are fine, though weak from long disuse.
Colin and Mary soon spend almost every day in the garden, sometimes with Dickon as company.
The children and Ben conspire to keep Colin recovering health secret from the other staff, so as to surprise his father, who is travelling abroad.
As Colin health improves, his father sees coinciding increase in spirits, culminating in dream where his late wife calls to him from inside the garden.
When he receives letter from Mrs Sowerby, he takes the opportunity finally to return home.
He walks the outer garden wall in his wife memory, but hears voices inside, finds the door unlocked, and is shocked to see the garden in full bloom, and his son healthy, having just won race against the other two children.
The servants watch, stunned, as Mr Craven and Colin walk back to the manor together.
The secret garden at Misselthwaite Manor is the site of both the near destruction and the subsequent regeneration of family.
Another theme is when thing is neglected it withers and dies, but when it is worked on and cared for it thrives, as Mary and Colin do.
The book working title was Mistress Mary, in reference to the English nursery rhyme Mary, Mary, Quite Contrary.
Parts of it were written during Burnett visits to Buile Hill Park, The Secret Garden was first serialised, starting in autumn in The American Magazine, publication aimed at adults.
The entire book was first published in summer by Frederick A. Stokes in New York, and published that year by William Heinemann in London.
Its copyright expired in the United States in and in most other parts of the world in placing the book in the public domain.
As result, several abridged and unabridged editions were published during the late and early such as the full color illustrated edition from David R. Godine, Publisher in .
Maytham Hall in Kent, England, where Burnett lived for number of years during her marriage, is often cited as the inspiration for the book setting.
Burnett kept an extensive garden, including an impressive rose garden.
However, it has been noted that besides the garden, Maytham Hall and Misselthwaite Manor are physically very different.
Inga Moore abridged edition of illustrated by her, is arranged so that line of the text also serves as caption to picture.
Marketing to both adult and juvenile audiences may have had an effect on its early reception; the book was not as celebrated as Burnett previous works during her lifetime.
The Secret Garden paled in comparison to the popularity of Burnett other works for long period.
Tracing the book revival from almost complete eclipse at the time of Burnett death in Anne H. Lundin noted that the author obituary notices all remarked on Little Lord Fauntleroy and passed over The Secret Garden in silence.
With the rise of scholarly work in children literature over the past quarter century, The Secret Garden has risen steadily in prominence.
It is often noted as one of the best children books of the twentieth century.
In it ranked number in The Big Read, survey of the British public by the BBC to identify the "Nation Best loved Novel" (not children novel).
Based on online poll, the U.S. National Education Association named it one of "Teachers' Top Books for Children".
In it was ranked number among all time children novels in survey published by School Library Journal, monthly with primarily U.S.
A Little Princess was ranked number and Little Lord Fauntleroy did not make the Top .
Jeffrey Masson considers The Secret Garden "one of the greatest books ever written for children".
In an oblique compliment, Barbara Sleigh has her title character reading The Secret Garden on the train at the beginning of her children novel Jessamy.
Play media Video trailer from Angel Exit Theatre Company spring national tour of their Arts Council funded production of The Secret Garden, timed to coincide with the centenary of Burnett novel
The first filmed version was made in by the Famous Players Lasky Corporation with year old Lila Lee as Mary and Paul Willis as Dickon, but the film is thought lost.
In MGM filmed the second adaptation with Margaret O'Brien as Mary, Dean Stockwell as Colin and Brian Roper as Dickon.
This version was mostly in black and white, but the sequences set in the restored garden were filmed in Technicolor.
Noel Streatfeild novel The Painted Garden deals with making of this film.
American Zoetrope production was directed by Agnieszka Holland, with screenplay by Caroline Thompson, and starred Kate Maberly as Mary, Heydon Prowse as Colin, Andrew Knott as Dickon, John Lynch as Lord Craven and Dame Maggie Smith as Mrs. Medlock.
The executive producer was Francis Ford Coppola.
Dorothea Brooking adapted the book into several different television serials for the BBC: an eight part serial in an eight part serial in (starring Colin Spaull as Dickon) and seven part serial broadcast in which last has been released on DVD.
Hallmark Hall of Fame filmed TV adaptation of the novel in starring Gennie James as Mary, Barret Oliver as Dickon, and Jadrien Steele as Colin.
Billie Whitelaw appeared as Mrs Medlock and Derek Jacobi played the role of Archibald Craven, with Alison Doody appearing in flashbacks and visions as Lilias; Colin Firth made brief appearance as the adult Colin Craven.
The story was changed slightly, with Colin father, instead of being Mary uncle, being an old friend of Mary father, allowing Colin and Mary to start relationship as adults by the film end.
It was filmed at Highclere Castle, which later became known as the filming location for Downton Abbey.
A animated adaptation as an ABC Weekend Special starred Honor Blackman, Sir Derek Jacobi, Glynis Johns, Victor Spinetti, Anndi McAfee as Mary Lennox, Joe Baker as Ben Weatherstaff, Felix Bell as Dickon, Naomi Bell as Martha, Richard Stuart as Colin, and Frank Welker as Robin.
This version was released on video in by ABC Video.
In Japan, NHK produced and broadcast an anime adaptation of the novel in titled Anime Himitsu no Hanazono (アニメ ひみつの花園).
Miina Tominaga was featured as the voice of Mary, while Mayumi Tanaka voiced Colin.
The episode TV series was directed by Tameo Kohanawa and written by Kaoru Umeno.
Based on the title, this anime is sometimes mistakenly assumed to be related to the popular dorama series Himitsu no Hanazono.
Unavailable in the English language, it has been dubbed into several other languages including Spanish, Italian, Polish and Tagalog.
A Theatre for Young Audiences version was written in by Pamela Sterling of Arizona State University.
The adaptation won an American Alliance for Theatre and Education "Distinguished New Play" award and is listed in ASSITEH/USA International Bibliography of Outstanding Plays for Young Audiences.
Stage adaptations of the book have also been created.
In a musical version opened on Broadway, with music by Lucy Simon, and book and lyrics by Marsha Norman.
The production was nominated for seven Tony Awards, winning Best Book of Musical and Best Featured Actress in Musical for Daisy Eagan as Mary, then eleven years old.
In an opera by the American composer Nolan Gasser, which had been commissioned by the San Francisco Opera, premiered at the Zellerbach Hall at the University of California, Berkeley.
A stage play by Jessica Swale adapted from the novel was performed at Grosvenor Park Open Air Theatre in Chester .
In January Heyday Films and Studiocanal hired Marc Munden to direct Jack Thorne take on the novel.
A multimedia web series adaptation of the novel titled The Misselthwaite Archives was released on YouTube in .
The series consisted of episodes, which aired from January through October, as well as fictional letters, emails, text messages, social media accounts, and other documents about the characters.
