The short story read by Chip from the LibriVox project.
The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" is gothic story by American author Washington Irving, contained in his collection of essays and short stories entitled The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent..
Written while Irving was living abroad in Birmingham, England, "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" was first published in .
Along with Irving companion piece "Rip Van Winkle", "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" is among the earliest examples of American fiction with enduring popularity, especially during Halloween because of character known as the Headless Horseman believed to be Hessian soldier who was decapitated by cannonball in battle.
The story is set in in the countryside around the Dutch settlement of Tarry Town (historical Tarrytown, New York), in secluded glen called Sleepy Hollow.
Sleepy Hollow is renowned for its ghosts and the haunting atmosphere that pervades the imaginations of its inhabitants and visitors.
Some residents say this town was bewitched during the early days of the Dutch settlement.
Other residents say an old Native American chief, the wizard of his tribe, held his powwows here before the country was discovered by Master Hendrick Hudson.
The most infamous spectre in the Hollow is the Headless Horseman, said to be the ghost of Hessian trooper who had his head shot off by stray cannonball during "some nameless battle" of the American Revolutionary War, and who "rides forth to the scene of battle in nightly quest of his head".
The "Legend" relates the tale of Ichabod Crane, lean, lanky and extremely superstitious schoolmaster from Connecticut, who competes with Abraham "Brom Bones" Van Brunt, the town rowdy, for the hand of year old Katrina Van Tassel, the daughter and sole child of wealthy farmer, Baltus Van Tassel.
Ichabod Crane, Yankee and an outsider, sees marriage to Katrina as means of procuring Van Tassel extravagant wealth.
Bones, the local hero, vies with Ichabod for Katrina hand, playing series of pranks on the jittery schoolmaster, and the fate of Sleepy Hollow fortune weighs in the balance for some time.
The tension among the three is soon brought to head.
On placid autumn night, the ambitious Crane attends harvest party at the Van Tassels' homestead.
He dances, partakes in the feast, and listens to ghostly legends told by Brom and the locals, but his true aim is to propose to Katrina after the guests leave.
His intentions, however, are ill fated.
After having failed to secure Katrina hand, Ichabod rides home "heavy hearted and crestfallen" through the woods between Van Tassel farmstead and the Sleepy Hollow settlement.
As he passes several purportedly haunted spots, his active imagination is engorged by the ghost stories told at Baltus' harvest party.
After nervously passing under lightning stricken tulip tree purportedly haunted by the ghost of British spy Major André, Ichabod encounters cloaked rider at an intersection in menacing swamp.
Unsettled by his fellow traveler eerie size and silence, the teacher is horrified to discover that his companion head is not on his shoulders, but on his saddle.
In frenzied race to the bridge adjacent to the Old Dutch Burying Ground, where the Hessian is said to "vanish, according to rule, in flash of fire and brimstone" upon crossing it, Ichabod rides for his life, desperately goading his temperamental plow horse down the Hollow.
However, to Crane horror, the ghoul clambers over the bridge, rears his horse, and hurls his severed head into Ichabod terrified face.
The schoolmaster attempts to duck beneath the terrible missile, but is too late when it strikes his head and sends him tumbling headlong into the dust.
The next morning, Ichabod has mysteriously disappeared from town, leaving Katrina to marry Brom Bones, who was said "to look exceedingly knowing whenever the story of Ichabod was related".
Indeed, the only relics of the schoolmaster flight are his wandering horse, trampled saddle, discarded hat, and mysterious shattered pumpkin.
Although the true nature of both the Headless Horseman and Ichabod disappearance that night are left open to interpretation, the story implies that the ghost was really Brom (an agile stunt rider) in disguise, and suggests that Crane was knocked off his horse and immediately fled Sleepy Hollow, never to return there again.
Irving narrator concludes the story, however, by stating that the old Dutch wives continue to promote the belief that Ichabod was "spirited away by supernatural means", and legend develops around his disappearance and sightings of his melancholy spirit.
The Headless Horseman Pursuing Ichabod Crane by John Quidor
Irving wrote The Sketch Book during tour of Europe, and parts of the tale may also be traced to European origins.
Headless horsemen were staples of Northern European storytelling, featuring in German, Irish (e.g., Dullahan), Scandinavian (e.g., the Wild Hunt), and English legends, and were included in Robert Burns poem "Tam o' Shanter" and Bürger Der wilde Jäger, translated as The Wild Huntsman .
Usually viewed as omens of ill fortune for those who chose to disregard their apparitions, these specters found their victims in proud, scheming persons and characters with hubris and arrogance.
One particularly influential rendition of this folktale was recorded by the German folklorist Karl Musäus.
During the height of the American Revolutionary War, Irving writes that the country surrounding Tarry Town "was one of those highly favored places which abound with chronicle and great men.
The British and American line had run near it during the war; it had, therefore, been the scene of marauding, and infested with refugees, cow boys, and all kinds of border chivalry."
After the Battle of White Plains in October the country south of the Bronx River was abandoned by the Continental Army and occupied by the British.
The Americans were fortified north of Peekskill, leaving Westchester County mile stretch of scorched and desolated no man land, vulnerable to outlaws, raiders, and vigilantes.
Besides droves of Loyalist rangers and British light infantry, Hessian Jägers—renowned sharpshooters and horsemen—were among the raiders who often skirmished with Patriot militias.
The Headless Horseman, said to be decapitated Hessian soldier, may have indeed been based loosely on the discovery of just such Jäger headless corpse found in Sleepy Hollow after violent skirmish, and later buried by the Van Tassel family, in an unmarked grave in the Old Dutch Burying Ground.
The dénouement of the fictional tale is set at the bridge over the Pocantico River in the area of the Old Dutch Church and Burying Ground in Sleepy Hollow.
Irving, while he was an aide de camp to New York Gov.
Daniel D. Tompkins, met an army captain named Ichabod Crane in Sackets Harbor, New York during an inspection tour of fortifications in .
Irving may have patterned the character in "The Legend" after Jesse Merwin, who taught at the local schoolhouse in Kinderhook, further north along the Hudson River, where Irving spent several months in .
The inspiration for the character of Katrina Van Tassel was based on an actual young woman named Katrina Van Tassel.
Washington Irving stayed with her family for short time, and asked permission to use her name, and loosely base the character on her.
He told her and her family he liked to give his characters the names of people he had met.
Ichabod Crane, Respectfully Dedicated to Washington Irving.
William J. Wilgus artist Chromolithograph, c.
The story was the longest one published as part of The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent.
commonly referred to as The Sketch Book), which Irving issued serially throughout and using the pseudonym "Geoffrey Crayon".
With "Rip Van Winkle", "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" is one of Irving most anthologized, studied, and adapted sketches.
Both stories are often paired together in books and other representations, and both are included in surveys of early American literature and Romanticism.
Irving depictions of regional culture and his themes of progress versus tradition, supernatural intervention in the commonplace, and the plight of the individual outsider in an homogeneous community permeate both stories and helped to develop unique sense of American cultural and existential selfhood during the early century.
Will Rogers as Ichabod Crane in The Headless Horseman
Notable film and television variations include:
The Headless Horseman a silent film directed by Edward Venturini and starring Will Rogers as Ichabod Crane.
It was filmed on location in New York Hudson River Valley.
The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr. Toad an animated adaptation directed by James Algar, Clyde Geronimi, and Jack Kinney, produced by Walt Disney Productions, and narrated by Bing Crosby.
This version is more lighthearted and family friendly than Irving original story and most other adaptations, while the climactic chase is more extended than in the original story.
It was rereleased individually in as The Legend of Sleepy Hollow.
The Legend of Sleepy Hollow a television film directed by Henning Schellerup and filmed in Utah, starring Jeff Goldblum, Meg Foster, and Dick Butkus.
Executive producer Charles Sellier was nominated for an Emmy Award for his work on the movie.
Crane is depicted as skeptic regarding ghosts and the supernatural.
The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" the premiere episode of Shelley Duvall Tall Tales and Legends series, stars Ed Begley Jr. as Ichabod Crane, Beverly D'Angelo as Katrina, Tim Thomerson as Brom, and Charles Durning as Doffue Van Tassel, who is also the narrator.
The Tale of the Midnight Ride", episode of the Nickelodeon series Are You Afraid of the Dark?, serves as sequel to the original story.
A boy named Ian Matthews moves to Sleepy Hollow, where he develops crush on girl named Katie.
On Halloween night, they see the ghost of Ichabod Crane and send him over the bridge that the Headless Horseman cannot cross, unintentionally prompting the Horseman to pursue them instead of Crane.
In the Wishbone episode "Halloween Hound: The Legend of Creepy Collars", Wishbone imagines himself as Ichabod Crane and reenacts the story in his imagination when his owner goes on Halloween night scavenger hunt with two schoolmates, but is scared off by the Headless Horseman.
The Legend of Sleepy Hollow a Canadian American television film directed by Pierre Gang and starring Brent Carver and Rachelle Lefevre.
Sleepy Hollow a feature film adaption directed by Tim Burton which takes many liberties with the plot and characters, changing Crane from the local schoolmaster into police constable sent from New York City to investigate recent murders, and the Horseman is used as weapon against the local landowners.
The Night of the Headless Horseman an hour long computer animated special using motion capture.
Sleepy Hollow High a direct to video horror film shot in Maryland, in which group of misbehaving high school students are sent to the Sleepy Hollow Park Grounds to clean up vandalism and graffiti.
They soon realize that someone is taking the original legend too far.
The Hollow an ABC Family television film starring Kevin Zegers and Kaley Cuoco, and focusing on teenage descendant of Ichabod Crane.
The Legend of Sleepy Halliwell" an episode of the TV show Charmed, in which headless horseman murders the teachers at Magic School by beheading them.
Sleepy Hollow a crime/horror series in which Ichabod Crane is reimagined as an English professor and turncoat during the Revolutionary War, who awakens in the century and encounters the Headless Horseman, felled mercenary whom Crane had decapitated years prior.
Crane teams up with Abbie Mills, lieutenant in the Sleepy Hollow sheriff department, and together they try to stop the murderous Horseman and uncover conspiracy involving supernatural forces.
The show ran for four seasons.
In Sleepy Hollow a piano suite by Eastwood Lane
Sleepy Hollow a Broadway musical, with music by George Lessner and book and lyrics by Russell Maloney and Miriam Battista.
The Headless Horseman by Michael Jeffrey Shapiro, for baritone, itinerant string band, and orchestra
Sleepy Hollow a musical with book and lyrics by Jim Christian and music by Tom Edward Clark.
It premiered at Weber State University in Ogden, Utah on October .
It received the Kennedy Center American College Theater Festival Musical Theatre Award.
Undead Ahead Tale of the Midnight Ride by Motionless in White
Ronald Colman was the host and narrator for radio adaptation on NBC Favorite Story on July (requested by Walter Huston as that actor favorite story).
An adaptation was broadcast on September on NBC University of the Air: American Novels.
Bing Crosby recreated his Disney narration in Walt Disney Ichabod and the Legend of Sleepy Hollow for Decca Records (DAU ) in .
Lionel Barrymore narrated and wrote the music for version of the story on Full Fidelity Lion Records (L), branch of MGM Records, in .
In Glenn Close narrated version of the story for Windham Hill Records (WH ), later also released on audio cassette and CD (WD ).
The Legend of Sleepy Hollow An abridged version omitting the characters of Katrina and Brom, narrated by Winifred Phillips for the Radio Tales series on National Public Radio.
BBC Radio and BBC Radio Extra) have broadcast three part reading of the story with Martin Jarvis as the narrator.
U.S. postage stamp of Legend of Sleepy Hollow, issued October
Annually since before Halloween, the nonprofit organization Historic Hudson Valley has held "Legend Weekend", an event at the Philipsburg Manor House in Sleepy Hollow.
In the village of North Tarrytown, New York (as the village had been called since the late century), where many events of the story took place, officially changed its name to Sleepy Hollow.
Its high school teams are named "the Horsemen".
In a large sculpture depicting the Headless Horseman chasing Ichabod Crane was placed along Route in Sleepy Hollow/Tarrytown, New York.
Mural on water tower in Sleepy Hollow, Wyoming based on "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow"
Sleepy Hollow, Illinois, many of the street names reflect characters from the tale, and the image of the Headless Horseman can be found on many of the city landmarks and publications.
Sleepy Hollow, Marin County, California, has Irving Drive, Legend Road, Ichabod Court, Katrina Lane, Van Tassel Court, Baltus Lane, Crane Drive, and Van Winkle Drive.
Sleepy Hollow, Wyoming, has street names such as Pumpkin Court, Gunpowder Street, Ichabod Avenue, and Raven Street.
Hosts an annual event called Sleepy Hollow Days.
Bethel, Connecticut, "Sleepy Hollow Estates", Ichabod Lane, Legend Drive, and Katrina Circle.
Roanoke, Virginia, and Longwood, Florida, "Sleepy Hollow", street names such as Ichabod and Horseman.
Pearland, Texas, "Sleepy Hollow", street names such as Washington Irving Drive, Sleepy Hollow Drive, Crane Drive, Tarrytown Lane, and Brom Bones Boulevard.
Port Jervis, New York, Sleepy Hollow Road
Falls Church, Virginia, Street names Sleepy Hollow Road, Crane Drive, Ichabod Place, and Horseman Lane.
There is also Sleepy Hollow Park and Sleepy Hollow Bath Racquet Club.
Hampden Township, Pennsylvania, "Sleepy Hollow", Ichabod Court, Brom Court, and Katrina Court.
Sleepy Hollow State Park, Laingsburg, Michigan
The Ichabod Crane School District, Valatie, New York.
The school sports teams are called "The Riders" and silhouette of Ichabod Crane on his horse is often representative of the home team while silhouette of the Headless Horseman is representative of the opponent.
The wings in the junior high school are also named for characters and places, such as Katrina Van Tassel and Sleepy Hollow.
The Ichabod Crane Schoolhouse, Kinderhook, New York .
Orinda, California, has Washington Lane, Sleepy Hollow Lane, Tarry Lane, Van Ripper Lane, Van Tassel Lane, Tappan Lane, and Crane Court.
Pinson, Alabama Sleepy Hollow Subdivision has Sleepy Hollow Drive
Walt Disney World Sleepy Hollow quick service restaurant in Magic Kingdom theme park.
Sleepy Hollow Rest area, New South Wales, Australia
On the Far North Coast of New South Wales lies the Sleepy Hollow rest stop.
There is stop located either side of the road so that North and South bound traffic is able to stop.
The northbound stop is located km north of Ballina and the southbound stop is located km south of Tweed Heads.
Sleepy Hollow Cemetery, founded in is adjacent to the Old Dutch Burying Ground.
They are separately owned and administered.
