For the biological process, see Metamorphosis.
The Metamorphosis (German: Die Verwandlung) is novella written by Franz Kafka which was first published in .
One of Kafka best known works, The Metamorphosis tells the story of salesman Gregor Samsa who wakes one morning to find himself inexplicably transformed into huge insect (German ungeheures Ungeziefer, literally "monstrous vermin"), subsequently struggling to adjust to this new condition.
The novella has been widely discussed among literary critics, with differing interpretations being offered.
One day, Gregor Samsa, traveling salesman, wakes up to find himself transformed into an ungeheures Ungeziefer.
He reflects on how dreary life as traveling salesman is.
As he looks at the wall clock, he notices that he has overslept and missed his train for work.
He ponders the consequences of this delay.
Gregor becomes annoyed at how his boss never accepts excuses or explanations from any of his employees no matter how hard working they are, displaying an apparent lack of trusting abilities.
Gregor mother knocks on the door, and he answers her.
She is concerned for Gregor because he is late for work, which is unorthodox for him.
Gregor answers his mother and realizes that his voice has changed, but his answer is short, so his mother does not notice.
His sister, Grete, to whom he is very close, then whispers through the door and begs him to open it.
He tries to get out of bed but is incapable of moving his body.
While trying to move, he finds that his office manager, the chief clerk, has shown up to check on him.
He finally rocks his body to the floor and calls out that he will open the door shortly.
Offended by Gregor delayed response in opening the door, the clerk warns him of the consequences of missing work.
He adds that Gregor recent performance has been unsatisfactory.
Gregor disagrees and tells him that he will open the door shortly.
Nobody on the other side of the door has understood single word he had uttered as Gregor voice has also transformed, and they conclude that he is seriously ill.
Finally, Gregor manages to unlock and open the door with his mouth.
He apologizes to the office manager for the delay.
Horrified by Gregor appearance, his mother faints, and the manager bolts out of the apartment.
Gregor tries to catch up with him, but his father drives him back into the bedroom with cane and rolled newspaper.
Gregor injures himself squeezing back through the doorway, and his father slams the door shut.
Gregor awakens and sees that someone has put milk and bread in his room.
Initially excited, he quickly discovers that he has no taste for milk, once one of his favorites.
The next morning, his sister comes in, sees that he has not touched the milk, takes it away and presents him with different types of food.
Gregor happily eats the rotten food and leaves the fresh food untouched.
This begins routine in which his sister feeds him and cleans up while he hides under the couch, afraid that his appearance will frighten her.
Gregor spends his time listening through the wall to his family members talking.
They often discuss the difficult financial situation they find themselves in now that Gregor can't provide them any help.
Gregor had plans of sending Grete to the conservatory to pursue violin lessons, something everyone else—including Grete—considered dream.
His inability to provide for his family, coupled with his speechlessness, greatly reduce his thought processes.
Gregor also learns that his mother wants to visit him, but his sister and father will not let her.
Gregor grows more comfortable with his changed body.
He begins climbing the walls and ceiling for amusement.
Discovering Gregor new pastime, Grete decides to remove some of the furniture to give Gregor more space.
She and her mother begin taking furniture away, but Gregor finds their actions deeply distressing.
He tries to save picture on the wall of woman wearing fur hat, fur scarf, and fur muff.
Gregor mother sees him hanging on the wall and passes out.
Grete angrily calls out to Gregor—the first time anyone has spoken directly to him since his transformation.
Gregor runs out of the room and into the kitchen.
He encounters his father, who has just returned home from work.
The father throws apples at Gregor, and one of them sinks into sensitive spot in his back and remains lodged there, paralyzing his movements for month and damaging him permanently.
Gregor manages to get back into his bedroom but is severely injured.
One evening, the cleaning lady leaves Gregor door open while three lodgers, whom the family has taken on for additional income, lounge about the living room.
Grete has been asked to play the violin for them, and Gregor—who usually takes care to avoid crossing paths with anyone in the flat—creeps out of his bedroom to listen in the midst of his depression and resultant detachment.
The lodgers, who initially seemed interested in Grete, grow bored with her performance, but Gregor is transfixed by it.
One of the lodgers spots Gregor, and the rest become alarmed.
Gregor father tries to shove the lodgers back into their rooms, but the three men protest and announce that they will move out immediately without paying rent because of the disgusting conditions in the apartment.
Grete, who has by now become tired of taking care of Gregor and is realizing the burden his existence puts on each one in the family, tells her parents they must get rid of Gregor, or they will all be ruined.
Her father agrees, wishing Gregor could understand them and would leave of his own accord.
Gregor does, in fact, understand and slowly moves back to the bedroom.
There, determined to rid his family of his presence, Gregor dies from starvation, because he was so depressed he refused to eat.
Upon discovering Gregor is dead, the family feels great sense of relief.
The father kicks out the boarders and decides to fire the cleaning lady, who has disposed of Gregor body.
The family takes trolley ride out to the countryside, during which they consider their finances.
They decide to move to smaller apartment to further save money, an act they were unable to carry out in Gregor presence.
During this short trip, Mr. and Mrs. Samsa realize that, in spite of going through hardships which have brought an amount of paleness to her face, Grete appears to have grown up into pretty and well figured lady, which leads her parents to think about finding her husband.
Gregor is the main character of the story.
He works as traveling salesman in order to provide money for his sister and parents.
He wakes up one morning finding himself transformed into an insect.
After the metamorphosis, Gregor becomes unable to work and is confined to his room for most of the remainder of the story.
This prompts his family to begin working once again.
Gregor is depicted as isolated from society and often misunderstands the true intentions of others.
The name "Gregor Samsa" appears to derive partly from literary works Kafka had read.
A character in The Story of Young Renate Fuchs, by German Jewish novelist Jakob Wassermann is named Gregor Samassa.
The Viennese author Leopold von Sacher Masoch, whose sexual imagination gave rise to the idea of masochism, is also an influence.
Sacher Masoch wrote Venus in Furs a novel whose hero assumes the name Gregor at one point.
A "Venus in furs" literally recurs in The Metamorphosis in the picture that Gregor Samsa has hung on his bedroom wall.
Grete is Gregor younger sister, who becomes his caretaker after his metamorphosis.
Initially Grete and Gregor have close relationship, but this quickly fades.
While Grete initially volunteers to feed him and clean his room, she grows increasingly impatient with the burden and begins to leave his room in disarray out of spite.
Her initial decision to take care of Gregor may have come from desire to contribute and be useful to the family, since she becomes angry and upset when the mother cleans his room, and it is made clear that Grete is disgusted by Gregor; she could not enter Gregor room without opening the window first because of the nausea he caused her, and leaves without doing anything if Gregor is in plain sight.
She plays the violin and dreams of going to the conservatory, dream Gregor had intended to make happen; Gregor had planned on making the announcement on Christmas Day.
To help provide an income for the family after Gregor transformation, she starts working as salesgirl.
Grete is also the first to suggest getting rid of Gregor, which causes Gregor to plan his own death.
At the end of the story, Grete parents realize that she has become beautiful and full figured and decide to consider finding her husband.
After the metamorphosis, he is forced to return to work in order to support the family financially.
His attitude towards his son is harsh; he regards the transformed Gregor with disgust and possibly even fear, and he attacks him on multiple occasions.
Mrs. Samsa is Grete and Gregor mother.
She is initially shocked at Gregor transformation; however, she wants to enter his room.
This proves too much for her, thus giving rise to conflict between her maternal impulse and sympathy, and her fear and revulsion at Gregor new form.
The Charwoman is an old lady who is employed by the Samsa family to help take care of their household duties.
Apart from Grete and her father, she is the only person who is in close contact with Gregor.
She is the one who notices that Gregor had died and disposes of his body.
Like most Kafka works, The Metamorphosis tends to entail the use of religious (Max Brod) or psychological interpretation by most of its interpreters.
It has been particularly common to read the story as an expression of Kafka father complex, as was first done by Charles Neider in his The Frozen Sea: Study of Franz Kafka .
Besides the psychological approach, interpretations focusing on sociological aspects which see the Samsa family as portrayal of general social circumstances, have gained large following as well.
Vladimir Nabokov rejected such interpretations, noting that they do not live up to Kafka art.
He instead chose an interpretation guided by the artistic detail but categorically excluded any and all attempts at deciphering symbolical or allegorical level of meaning.
Arguing against the popular father complex theory, he observed that it is the sister, more so than the father, who should be considered the cruelest person in the story, as she is the one backstabbing Gregor.
As the central narrative theme he makes out the artist struggle for existence in society replete with philistines that destroys him step by step.
Commenting on Kafka style, he writes: “The transparency of his style underlines the dark richness of his fantasy world.
Contrast and uniformity, style and the depicted, portrayal and fable are seamlessly intertwined” (German: "Die Durchsichtigkeit seines Stils betont den dunklen Reichtum seiner Phantasiewelt.
Gegensatz und Einheitlichkeit, Stil und Dargestelltes, Darstellung und Fabel sind in vollkommener Weise ineinander verwoben.
In Nina Pelikan Straus wrote feminist interpretation of Metamorphosis, bringing to the forefront the transformation of the main character Gregor sister, Grete, and foregrounding the family and, particularly, younger sister transformation in the story.
Traditionally, critics of Metamorphosis have underplayed the fact that the story is not only about Gregor but also his family and especially, Grete metamorphosis as it is mainly Grete, woman, daughter, sister, on whom the social and psychoanalytic resonances of the text depend.
In Gerhard Rieck pointed out that Gregor and his sister Grete form pair, which is typical for many of Kafka texts: It is made up of one passive, rather austere person and another active, more libidinal person.
The appearance of figures with such almost irreconcilable personalities who form couples in Kafka works has been evident since he wrote his short story Description of Struggle (e.g.
the narrator/young man and his “acquaintance”).
They also appear in The Judgement (Georg and his friend in Russia), in all three of his novels (e.g.
Robinson and Delamarche in Amerika) as well as in his short stories Country Doctor (the country doctor and the groom) and Hunger Artist (the hunger artist and the panther).
Rieck views these pairs as parts of one single person (hence the similarity between the names Gregor and Grete), and in the final analysis as the two determining components of the author personality.
Not only in Kafka life but also in his oeuvre does Rieck see the description of fight between these two parts.
Reiner Stach argued in that no elucidating comments were needed to illustrate the story and that it was convincing by itself, self contained, even absolute.
He believes that there is no doubt the story would have been admitted to the canon of world literature even if we had known nothing about its author.
According to Peter André Alt the figure of the vermin becomes drastic expression of Gregor Samsa deprived existence.
Reduced to carrying out his professional responsibilities, anxious to guarantee his advancement and vexed with the fear of making commercial mistakes, he is the creature of functionalistic professional life.
In Ralf Sudau took the view that particular attention should be paid to the motifs of self abnegation and disregard for reality.
Gregor earlier behavior was characterized by self renunciation and his pride in being able to provide secure and leisured existence for his family.
When he finds himself in situation where he himself is in need of attention and assistance and in danger of becoming parasite, he doesn't want to admit this new role to himself and be disappointed by the treatment he receives from his family, which is becoming more and more careless and even hostile over time.
According to Sundau, Gregor is self denyingly hiding his nauseating appearance under the canapé and gradually famishing, thus pretty much complying with the more or less blatant wish of his family.
His gradual emaciation and “self reduction” shows signs of fatal hunger strike (which on the part of Gregor is unconscious and unsuccessful, on the part of his family not understood or ignored).
Sudau (p. also lists the names of selected interpreters of The Metamorphosis (e.g.
According to them, the narrative is metaphor for the suffering resulting from leprosy, an escape into the disease or symptom onset, an image of an existence which is defaced by the career, or revealing staging which cracks the veneer and superficiality of everyday circumstances and exposes its cruel essence.
He further notes that Kafka representational style is on one hand characterized by an idiosyncratic interpenetration of realism and fantasy, worldly mind, rationality and clarity of observation, and on the other hand by folly, outlandishness and fallacy.
He also points to the grotesque and tragicomical, silent film like elements.
Fernando Bermejo Rubio argued that the story is often viewed unjustly as inconclusive.
He derives his interpretative approach from the fact that the descriptions of Gregor and his family environment in The Metamorphosis contradict each other.
Diametrically opposed versions exist of Gregor back, his voice, of whether he is ill or already undergoing the metamorphosis, whether he is dreaming or not, which treatment he deserves, of his moral point of view (false accusations made by Grete) and whether his family is blameless or not.
Bermejo Rubio emphasizes that Kafka ordered in that there should be no illustration of Gregor.
He argues that it is exactly this absence of visual narrator that is essential for Kafka project, for he who depicts Gregor would stylize himself as an omniscient narrator.
Another reason why Kafka opposed such an illustration is that the reader should not be biased in any way before his reading process was getting under way.
That the descriptions are not compatible with each other is indicative of the fact that the opening statement is not to be trusted.
If the reader isn't hoodwinked by the first sentence and still thinks of Gregor as human being, he will view the story as conclusive and realize that Gregor is victim of his own degeneration.
Volker Drüke believes that the crucial metamorphosis in the story is that of Grete.
She is the character the title is directed at.
Gregor metamorphosis is followed by him languishing and ultimately dying.
Grete, by contrast, has matured as result of the new family circumstances and assumed responsibility.
In the end after the brother death the parents also notice that their daughter, “who was getting more animated all the time, had blossomed into beautiful and voluptuous young woman”, and want to look for partner for her.
From this standpoint, Grete transition, her metamorphosis from girl into woman, is the subtextual theme of the story.
Dependency tree illustrating the difference in syntax between the first sentence of Kafka The Metamorphosis in translation by Ian Johnston and in the original German
Kafka sentences often deliver an unexpected impact just before the period that being the finalizing meaning and focus.
This is achieved from the construction of sentences in the original German, where the verbs of subordinate clauses are put at the end.
For example, in the opening sentence, it is the final word, verwandelt, that indicates transformation:
As Gregor Samsa awoke one morning from uneasy dreams, he found himself transformed in his bed into gigantic insect like creature.
These constructions are not directly translatable to English, so it is up to the translator to provide the reader with the effect of the original text.
English translators have often sought to render the word Ungeziefer as "insect", but this is not strictly accurate.
In Middle High German, Ungeziefer literally means "unclean animal not suitable for sacrifice" and is sometimes used colloquially to mean "bug" a very general term, unlike the scientific sounding "insect".
Kafka had no intention of labeling Gregor as any specific thing, but instead wanted to convey Gregor disgust at his transformation.
The phrasing used by Joachim Neugroschel whereas David Wyllie says" "transformed in his bed into horrible vermin".
However, in Kafka letter to his publisher of October in which he discusses his concern about the cover illustration for the first edition, he uses the term Insekt, saying: "The insect itself is not to be drawn.
It is not even to be seen from distance.
Ungeziefer has sometimes been translated as "cockroach", "dung beetle", "beetle", and other highly specific terms.
The term "dung beetle" or Mistkäfer is, in fact, used by the cleaning lady near the end of the story, but it is not used in the narration: "At first, she also called him to her with words which she presumably thought were friendly, like ‘Come here for bit, old dung beetle!’ or ‘Hey, look at the old dung beetle!’" Ungeziefer also denotes sense of separation between himself and his environment: he is unclean and must therefore be secluded.
Vladimir Nabokov, who was lepidopterist as well as writer and literary critic, insisted that Gregor was not cockroach, but beetle with wings under his shell, and capable of flight.
Nabokov left sketch annotated, "just over three feet long", on the opening page of his (heavily corrected) English teaching copy.
In his accompanying lecture notes, Nabokov discusses the type of insect Gregor has been transformed into, concluding that Gregor "is not, technically, dung beetle.
S. Fischer Verlag, Frankfurt am Main and Hamburg .
Wolf Kittler, Hans Gerd Koch and Gerhard Neumann, S. Fischer Verlag, Frankfurt am Main ps.
Roger Herms, original version S. Fischer Verlag ISBN
with commentary by Heribert Kuhn, Suhrkamp Verlag, Frankfurt am Main ISBN .
Further information: The Metamorphosis in popular culture
