This article is about the Charles Dickens novel.
Great Expectations Title page of Vol.
of first edition, July AuthorCharles DickensCountryUnited KingdomLanguageEnglishGenreNovelPublishedSerialised book form PublisherChapman HallMedia typePrintPages (first edition )Preceded byA Tale of Two Cities Followed byOur Mutual Friend
Great Expectations is the thirteenth novel by Charles Dickens and his penultimate completed novel: bildungsroman that depicts the personal growth and personal development of an orphan nicknamed Pip.
It is Dickens second novel, after David Copperfield, to be fully narrated in the first person.
The novel was first published as serial in Dickens weekly periodical All the Year Round, from December to August .
In October Chapman and Hall published the novel in three volumes.
The novel is set in Kent and London in the early to mid century and contains some of Dickens most memorable scenes, including the opening in graveyard, where the young Pip is accosted by the escaped convict, Abel Magwitch.
and has colourful cast of characters who have entered popular culture.
These include the eccentric Miss Havisham, the beautiful but cold Estella, and Joe, the unsophisticated and kind blacksmith.
Dickens themes include wealth and poverty, love and rejection, and the eventual triumph of good over evil.
has been translated into many languages and adapted numerous times into various media.
Upon its release, the novel received near universal acclaim.
Although Dickens contemporary Thomas Carlyle referred to it disparagingly as that "Pip nonsense," he nevertheless reacted to each fresh instalment with "roars of laughter.
Later, George Bernard Shaw praised the novel, as "All of one piece and consistently truthful.
During the serial publication, Dickens was pleased with public response to Great Expectations and its sales; when the plot first formed in his mind, he called it "a very fine, new and grotesque idea.
In the century, the novel retains good ratings among literary critics and is popular with the British public.
Publication in All the Year Round
On Christmas Eve, around Pip, an orphan who is about seven years old, encounters an escaped convict in the village churchyard, while visiting the graves of his parents and siblings.
Pip now lives with his abusive elder sister and her kind husband Joe Gargery, blacksmith.
The convict scares Pip into stealing food and file.
Early on Christmas morning Pip returns with the file, pie and brandy.
During Christmas Dinner that evening, at the moment Pip theft is about to be discovered, soldiers arrive and ask Joe to repair some shackles.
Joe and Pip accompany them as they recapture the convict who is fighting with another escaped convict.
The first convict confesses to stealing food from the smithy.
Pip is ashamed of Joe at Satis House, by F. A. Fraser
A year or two later, Miss Havisham, wealthy spinster who still wears her old wedding dress and lives as recluse in the dilapidated Satis House, asks Mr Pumblechook, relation of the Gargery, to find boy to visit her.
Pip visits Miss Havisham and falls in love with her adopted daughter Estella.
Estella remains aloof and hostile to Pip, which Miss Havisham encourages.
Pip visits Miss Havisham regularly, until he is old enough to learn trade.
Joe accompanies Pip for the last visit, when she gives the money for Pip to be bound as apprentice blacksmith.
Joe surly assistant, Dolge Orlick, is envious of Pip and dislikes Mrs Joe.
When Pip and Joe are away from the house, Mrs Joe is brutally attacked, leaving her unable to speak or do her work.
Orlick is suspected of the attack.
Mrs Joe becomes kind hearted after the attack.
Pip former schoolmate Biddy joins the household to help with her care.
Miss Havisham with Estella and Pip.
Four years into Pip apprenticeship, Mr Jaggers, lawyer, tells him that he has been provided with money, from an anonymous benefactor, so that he can become gentleman.
Pip is to leave for London, but presuming that Miss Havisham is his benefactor, he first visits her.
Pip sets up house in London at Barnard Inn with Herbert Pocket, the son of his tutor, Matthew Pocket, who is cousin of Miss Havisham.
Herbert and Pip have previously met at Satis Hall, where Herbert was rejected as playmate for Estella.
He tells Pip how Miss Havisham was defrauded and deserted by her fiancé.
Pip meets fellow pupils, Bentley Drummle, brute of man from wealthy noble family, and Startop, who is agreeable.
Jaggers disburses the money Pip needs.
When Joe visits Pip at Barnard Inn, Pip is ashamed of him.
Joe relays message from Miss Havisham that Estella will be at Satis House for visit.
Pip returns there to meet Estella and is encouraged by Miss Havisham, but he avoids visiting Joe.
He is disquieted to see Orlick now in service to Miss Havisham.
He mentions his misgivings to Jaggers, who promises Orlick dismissal.
Back in London, Pip and Herbert exchange their romantic secrets: Pip adores Estella and Herbert is engaged to Clara.
Pip meets Estella when she is sent to Richmond to be introduced into society.
Pip and Herbert build up debts.
Mrs Joe dies and Pip returns to his village for the funeral.
Pip income is fixed at per annum when he comes of age at twenty one.
With the help of Jaggers' clerk, Wemmick, Pip plans to help advance Herbert future prospects by anonymously securing him position with the shipbroker, Clarriker.
Pip takes Estella to Satis House.
She and Miss Havisham quarrel over Estella coldness.
In London, Bentley Drummle outrages Pip, by proposing toast to Estella.
Later, at an Assembly Ball in Richmond, Pip witnesses Estella meeting Bentley Drummle and warns her about him; she replies that she has no qualms about entrapping him.
A week after he turns years old, Pip learns that his benefactor is the convict he encountered in the churchyard, Abel Magwitch, who had been transported to New South Wales after that escape.
He has become wealthy after gaining his freedom there but cannot return to England on pain of death.
However, he returns to see Pip, who was the motivation for all his success.
Pip is shocked, and stops taking money from him.
Subsequently, Pip and Herbert Pocket devise plan for Magwitch to escape from England.
Magwitch shares his past history with Pip, and reveals that the escaped convict whom he fought in the churchyard was Compeyson, the fraudster who had deserted Miss Havisham.
Pip returns to Satis Hall to visit Estella and encounters Bentley Drummle, who has also come to see her and now has Orlick as his servant.
Pip accuses Miss Havisham of misleading him about his benefactor.
She admits to doing so, but says that her plan was to annoy her relatives.
Pip declares his love to Estella, who, coldly, tells him that she plans on marrying Drummle.
Heartbroken, Pip walks back to London, where Wemmick warns him that Compeyson is seeking him.
Pip and Herbert continue preparations for Magwitch escape.
At Jaggers house for dinner, Wemmick tells Pip how Jaggers acquired his maidservant, Molly, rescuing her from the gallows when she was accused of murder.
Then, full of remorse, Miss Havisham tells Pip how the infant Estella was brought to her by Jaggers and raised by her to be cold hearted.
She knows nothing about Estella parentage.
She also tells Pip that Estella is now married.
She gives Pip money to pay for Herbert Pocket position at Clarriker, and asks for his forgiveness.
As Pip is about to leave, Miss Havisham accidentally sets her dress on fire.
Pip saves her, injuring himself in the process.
She eventually dies from her injuries, lamenting her manipulation of Estella and Pip.
Pip now realises that Estella is the daughter of Molly and Magwitch.
When confronted about this, Jaggers discourages Pip from acting on his suspicions.
Magwitch makes himself known to Pip
A few days before Magwitch planned escape, Pip is lured by an anonymous letter into sluice house near his old home, where he is seized by Orlick, who intends to kill him.
Orlick confesses to injuring Pip sister.
As Pip is about to be struck by hammer, Herbert Pocket and Startop arrive to rescue him.
The three of them pick up Magwitch to row him to the steamboat for Hamburg, but they are met by police boat carrying Compeyson, who has offered to identify Magwitch.
Magwitch seizes Compeyson, and they fight in the river.
Seriously injured, Magwitch is taken by the police.
Pip is aware that Magwitch fortune will go to the crown after his trial.
But Herbert, who is preparing to move to Cairo, Egypt, to manage Clarriker office there, offers Pip position there.
Pip regularly visits Magwitch in the prison hospital as he awaits trial, and on Magwitch deathbed tells him that his daughter Estella is alive.
After Herbert departure for Cairo, Pip falls ill in his rooms, and faces arrest for debt.
However, Joe nurses Pip back to health and pays off his debt.
When Pip begins to recover, Joe slips away.
Pip then returns to propose to Biddy, only to find that she has married Joe.
Pip asks Joe forgiveness, promises to repay him and leaves for Cairo.
There he shares lodgings with Herbert and Clara, and eventually advances to become third in the company.
Only then does Herbert learn that Pip paid for his position in the firm.
After working eleven years in Egypt, Pip returns to England and visits Joe, Biddy and their son, Pip Jr. Then in the ruins of Satis House he meets the widowed Estella, who asks Pip to forgive her, assuring him that misfortune has opened her heart.
As Pip takes Estella hand and they leave the moonlit ruins, he sees "no shadow of another parting from her.
Philip Pirrip, nicknamed Pip, an orphan and the protagonist and narrator of Great Expectations.
In his childhood, Pip dreamed of becoming blacksmith like his kind brother in law, Joe Gargery.
At Satis House, about age he meets and falls in love with Estella, and tells Biddy that he wants to become gentleman.
As result of Magwitch anonymous patronage, Pip lives in London after learning the blacksmith trade, and becomes gentleman.
Pip assumes his benefactor is Miss Havisham; the discovery that his true benefactor is convict shocks him.
Pip, at the end of the story,is united with Estella.
Joe Gargery, Pip brother in law, and his first father figure.
He is blacksmith who is always kind to Pip and the only person with whom Pip is always honest.
Joe is disappointed when Pip decides to leave his home to live in London to become gentleman rather than be blacksmith in business with Joe.
He is strong man who bears the shortcomings of those closest to him.
Mrs Joe Gargery, Pip hot tempered adult sister, Georgiana Maria, called Mrs Joe, years older than Pip.
She brings him up after their parents' death.
She does the work of the household but too often loses her temper and beats her family.
Orlick, her husband journeyman, attacks her during botched burglary, and she is left disabled until her death.
Mr Pumblechook, Joe Gargery uncle, an officious bachelor and corn merchant.
While not knowing how to deal with growing boy, he tells Mrs Joe, as she is known, how noble she is to bring up Pip.
As the person who first connected Pip to Miss Havisham, he claims to have been the original architect of Pip expectations.
Pip dislikes Mr Pumblechook for his pompous, unfounded claims.
When Pip stands up to him in public place, after those expectations are dashed, Mr Pumblechook turns those listening to the conversation against Pip.
Miss Havisham, wealthy spinster who takes Pip on as companion for herself and her adopted daughter, Estella.
Havisham is wealthy, eccentric woman who has worn her wedding dress and one shoe since the day that she was jilted at the altar by her fiancé.
Her house is unchanged as well.
She hates all men, and plots to wreak twisted revenge by teaching Estella to torment and spurn men, including Pip, who loves her.
Miss Havisham is later overcome with remorse for ruining both Estella and Pip chances for happiness.
Shortly after confessing her plotting to Pip and begging for his forgiveness, she is badly burned when her dress accidentally catches fire.
In later chapter Pip learns from Joe that she is dead.
Estella, Miss Havisham adopted daughter, whom Pip pursues.
She is beautiful girl and grows more beautiful after her schooling in France.
Estella represents the life of wealth and culture for which Pip strives.
Since Miss Havisham ruined Estella ability to love, Estella cannot return Pip passion.
She warns Pip of this repeatedly, but he will not or cannot believe her.
Estella does not know that she is the daughter of Molly, Jaggers housekeeper, and the convict Abel Magwitch, given up for adoption to Miss Havisham after her mother was arrested for murder.
In marrying Bentley Drummle, she rebels against Miss Havisham plan to have her break husband heart, as Drummle is not interested in Estella but simply in the Havisham fortune.
He is the patriarch of the Pocket family, but unlike her other relatives, he is not greedy for Havisham wealth.
Matthew Pocket tutors young gentlemen, such as Bentley Drummle, Startop, Pip and his own son Herbert.
Herbert Pocket, the son of Matthew Pocket, who was invited like Pip to visit Miss Havisham, but she did not take to him.
Pip first meets Herbert as "pale young gentleman" who challenges Pip to fistfight at Miss Havisham house when both are children.
He later becomes Pip friend, tutoring him in the "gentlemanly" arts and sharing his rooms with Pip in London.
Camilla, one of Matthew Pocket' sisters, and therefore cousin of Miss Havisham, an obsequious, detestable woman who is intent on pleasing Miss Havisham to get her money.
Cousin Raymond, relative of Miss Havisham who is only interested in her money.
Georgiana, relative of Miss Havisham who is only interested in her money.
She is one of the many relatives who hang around Miss Havisham "like flies" for her wealth.
Sarah Pocket, the sister of Matthew Pocket, relative of Miss Havisham.
She is often at Satis House.
She is described as "a dry, brown corrugated old woman, with small face that might have been made out of walnut shells, and large mouth like cat without the whiskers."
The Convict, who escapes from prison ship, whom Pip treats kindly, and who in turn becomes Pip benefactor.
His name is Abel Magwitch, but he uses the aliases "Provis" and "Mr Campbell" when he returns to England from exile in Australia.
He is lesser actor in crime with Compeyson, but gains longer sentence in an apparent application of justice by social class.
Mr and Mrs Hubble, simple folk who think they are more important than they really are.
Mr Wopsle, clerk of the church in Pip village.
He later gives up the church work and moves to London to pursue his ambition to be an actor, adopting the stage name "Mr Waldengarver."
He sees the other convict in the audience of one of his performances, attended also by Pip.
Biddy, Wopsle second cousin and near Pip age; she teaches in the evening school at her grandmother home in Pip village.
Pip wants to learn more, so he asks her to teach him all she can.
After helping Mrs Joe after the attack, Biddy opens her own school.
A kind and intelligent but poor young woman, she is, like Pip and Estella, an orphan.
Orlick was attracted to her, but she did not want his attentions.
Pip ignores her affections for him as he pursues Estella.
Recovering from his own illness after the failed attempt to get Magwitch out of England, Pip returns to claim Biddy as his bride, arriving in the village just after she marries Joe Gargery.
Biddy and Joe later have two children, one named after Pip.
In the ending to the novel discarded by Dickens but revived by students of the novel development, Estella mistakes the boy as Pip child.
Mr Wemmick and "The Aged P.", illustration by Sol Eytinge Jr.
Mr Jaggers, prominent London lawyer who represents the interests of diverse clients, both criminal and civil.
He represents Pip benefactor and Miss Havisham as well.
By the end of the story, his law practice links many of the characters.
John Wemmick, Jaggers' clerk, who is Pip chief go between with Jaggers and looks after Pip in London.
Wemmick lives with his father, "The Aged Parent", in small replica of castle, complete with drawbridge and moat, in Walworth.
Molly, Mr Jaggers' maidservant whom Jaggers saved from the gallows for murder.
She is revealed to be Magwitch estranged wife and Estella mother.
Compeyson, convict who escapes the prison ship after Magwitch, who beats him up ashore.
A professional swindler, he was engaged to marry Miss Havisham, but he was in league with Arthur Havisham to defraud Miss Havisham of part of her fortune.
Later he sets up Magwitch to take the fall for another swindle.
He works with the police when he learns Abel Magwitch is in London, fearing Magwitch after their first escapes years earlier.
When the police boat encounters the one carrying Magwitch, the two grapple, and Compeyson drowns in the Thames.
Arthur Havisham, younger half brother of Miss Havisham, who plots with Compeyson to swindle her.
Dolge Orlick, journeyman blacksmith at Joe Gargery forge.
Strong, rude and sullen, he is as churlish as Joe is gentle and kind.
He ends up in fistfight with Joe over Mrs Gargery taunting, and Joe easily defeats him.
This sets in motion an escalating chain of events that leads him secretly to assault Mrs Gargery and to try to kill her brother Pip.
The police ultimately arrest him for housebreaking into Uncle Pumblechook, where he is later jailed.
Bentley Drummle, coarse, unintelligent young man from wealthy noble family.
Pip meets him at Mr Pocket house, as Drummle is also to be trained in gentlemanly skills.
Drummle is hostile to Pip and everyone else.
He is rival for Estella attentions and eventually marries her and is said to abuse her.
He dies from an accident following his mistreatment of horse.
Clara Barley, very poor girl living with her gout ridden father.
She marries Herbert Pocket near the novel end.
She dislikes Pip at first because of his spendthrift ways.
After she marries Herbert, they invite Pip to live with them.
Miss Skiffins occasionally visits Wemmick house and wears green gloves.
She changes those green gloves for white ones when she marries Wemmick.
Startop, like Bentley Drummle, is Pip fellow student, but unlike Drummle, he is kind.
He assists Pip and Herbert in their efforts to help Magwitch escape.
As Dickens began writing Great Expectations, he undertook series of hugely popular and remunerative reading tours.
His domestic life had, however, disintegrated in the late and he had separated from his wife, Catherine Dickens, and was having secret affair with the much younger Ellen Ternan.
The introduction of the Penguin English Library edition suggests that the reluctance with which Ellen Ternan became his mistress is reflected in the icy teasing of Estella in Great Expectations.
In his Book of Memoranda, begun in Dickens wrote names for possible characters: Magwitch, Provis, Clarriker, Compey, Pumblechook, Orlick, Gargery, Wopsle, Skiffins, some of which became familiar in Great Expectations.
There is also reference to "knowing man", possible sketch of Bentley Drummle.
Another evokes house full of "Toadies and Humbugs", foreshadowing the visitors to Satis House in chapter .
Margaret Cardwell discovered the "premonition" of Great Expectations from September letter from Dickens to W. H. Wills, in which Dickens speaks of recycling an "odd idea" from the Christmas special "A House to Let" and "the pivot round which my next book shall revolve.
The "odd idea" concerns an individual who "retires to an old lonely house…resolved to shut out the world and hold no communion with it.
In an August letter to Thomas Carlyle, Dickens reported his agitation whenever he prepared new book.
month later, in letter to John Forster, Dickens announced that he just had new idea.
Publication in All the Year Round
Advertisement for Great Expectations in All the Year Round.
Dickens was pleased with the idea, calling it "such very fine, new and grotesque idea" in letter to Forster.
He planned to write "a little piece", "grotesque tragi comic conception", about young hero who befriends an escaped convict, who then makes fortune in Australia and anonymously bequeaths his property to the hero.
In the end, the hero loses the money because it is forfeited to the Crown.
In his biography of Dickens, Forster wrote that in the early idea "was the germ of Pip and Magwitch, which at first he intended to make the groundwork of tale in the old twenty number form.
Dickens presented the relationship between Pip and Magwitch pivotal to Great Expectations but without Miss Havisham, Estella, or other characters he later created.
As the idea and Dickens ambition grew, he began writing.
However, in September, the weekly All the Year Round saw its sales fall, and its flagship publication, Day Ride by Charles Lever, lost favour with the public.
Dickens "called council of war", and believed that to save the situation, "the one thing to be done was for to strike in.
The "very fine, new and grotesque idea" became the magazine new support: weeklies, five hundred pages, just over one year thirty six episodes, starting December.
The magazine continued to publish Lever novel until its completion on March but it became secondary to Great Expectations.
Immediately, sales resumed, and critics responded positively, as exemplified by The Times praise: "Great Expectations is not, indeed, best work, but it is to be ranked among his happiest.
Dickens, whose health was not the best, felt "The planning from week to week was unimaginably difficult" but persevered.
He thought he had found "a good name", decided to use the first person "throughout", and thought the beginning was "excessively droll": "I have put child and good natured foolish man, in relations that seem to me very funny.
Four weekly episodes were "ground off the wheel" in October the months passed without the anguished cries that usually accompanied the writing of his novels.
he only had few notes on the characters' ages, the tide ranges for chapter and the draft of an ending.
In late December, Dickens wrote to Mary Boyle that "Great Expectations very great success and universally liked.
Charles Dickens, Jr. (in possibly the model for Herbert Pocket
Dickens gave six readings from March to April and in May, Dickens took few days' holiday in Dover.
On the eve of his departure, he took some friends and family members for trip by boat from Blackwall to Southend on Sea.
Ostensibly for pleasure, the mini cruise was actually working session for Dickens to examine banks of the river in preparation for the chapter devoted to Magwitch attempt to escape.
Dickens then revised Herbert Pocket appearance, no doubt, asserts Margaret Cardwell, to look more like his son Charley.
On June Dickens wrote to Macready that Great Expectations had been completed and on June, asked the editor to prepare the novel for publication.
Following comments by Edward Bulwer Lytton that the ending was too sad, Dickens rewrote it prior to publication.
The ending set aside by Dickens has Pip, who is still single, briefly see Estella in London; after becoming Bentley Drummle widow, she has remarried.
winding up will be away from all such things as they conventionally go.
Dickens revised the ending for publication so that Pip meets Estella in the ruins of Satis House, she is widow and he is single.
His changes at the conclusion of the novel did not quite end either with the final weekly part or the first bound edition, because Dickens further changed the last sentence in the amended version from "I could see the shadow of no parting from her.
to "I saw no shadow of another parting from her".
As Pip uses litotes, "no shadow of another parting", it is ambiguous whether Pip and Estella marry or Pip remains single.
Angus Calder, writing for an edition in the Penguin English Library, believed the less definite phrasing of the amended version perhaps hinted at buried meaning: '...at this happy moment, did not see the shadow of our subsequent parting looming over us.
In letter to Forster, Dickens explained his decision to alter the draft ending: "You will be surprised to hear that have changed the end of Great Expectations from and after Pip return to Joe Bulwer, who has been, as think you know, extraordinarily taken with the book, strongly urged it upon me, after reading the proofs, and supported his views with such good reasons that have resolved to make the change.
I have put in as pretty little piece of writing as could, and have no doubt the story will be more acceptable through the alteration.
This discussion between Dickens, Bulwer Lytton and Forster has provided the basis for much discussion on Dickens underlying views for this famous novel.
Earle Davis, in his study of Dickens, wrote that "it would be an inadequate moral point to deny Pip any reward after he had shown growth of character," and that "Eleven years might change Estella too.
John Forster felt that the original ending was "more consistent" and "more natural" but noted the new ending popularity.
George Gissing called that revision "a strange thing, indeed, to befall Dickens" and felt that Great Expectations would have been perfect had Dickens not altered the ending in deference to Bulwer Lytton.
In contrast, John Hillis Miller stated that Dickens personality was so assertive that Bulwer Lytton had little influence, and welcomed the revision: "The mists of infatuation have cleared away, can be joined.
Earl Davis notes that B Shaw published the novel in for The Limited Editions Club with the first ending and that The Rhinehart Edition of presents both endings.
George Orwell wrote, "Psychologically the latter part of Great Expectations is about the best thing Dickens ever did," but, like John Forster and several early century writers, including George Bernard Shaw, felt that the original ending was more consistent with the draft, as well as the natural working out of the tale.
Modern literary criticism is split over the matter.
Dickens and Wills co owned All the Year Round, one the other %.
Since Dickens was his own publisher, he did not require contract for his own works.
Although intended for weekly publication, Great Expectations was divided into nine monthly sections, with new pagination for each.
Harper Weekly published the novel from November to August in the US and All the Year Round published it from December to August in the UK.
Dickens welcomed contract with Tauchnitz January for publication in English for the European continent.
Publications in Harper Weekly were accompanied by forty illustrations by John McLenan; however, this is the only Dickens work published in All the Year Round without illustrations.
Robert Patten identifies four American editions in and sees the proliferation of publications in Europe and across the Atlantic as "extraordinary testimony" to Great Expectations popularity.
five subsequent reprints between July and October, and one volume edition in .
The "bargain" edition was published in the Library Edition in and the Charles Dickens edition in .
To this list, Paul Schlicke adds "two meticulous scholarly editions", one Clarendon Press published in with an introduction by Margaret Cardwell and another with an introduction by Edgar Rosenberg, published by Norton in .
The novel was published with one ending, visible in the four on line editions listed in the External links at the end of this article.
In some century editions, the novel ends as originally published in and in an afterword, the ending Dickens did not publish, along with brief story of how friend persuaded him to happier ending for Pip, is presented to the reader (for example, audio edition by Recorded Books).
In Marcus Stone, son of Dickens old friend, the painter Frank Stone, was invited to create eight woodcuts for the Library Edition.
According to Paul Schlicke, these illustrations are mediocre yet were included in the Charles Dickens edition, and Stone created illustrations for Dickens subsequent novel, Our Mutual Friend.
Robert Patten estimates that All the Year Round sold copies of Great Expectations each week, and Mudie, the largest circulating library, which purchased about copies, stated that at least people read each copy.
Aside from the dramatic plot, the Dickensian humour also appealed to readers.
Dickens wrote to Forster in October that "You will not have to complain of the want of humour as in the Tale of Two Cities," an opinion Forster supports, finding that "Dickens humour, not less than his creative power, was at its best in this book.
Moreover, according to Paul Schlicke, readers found the best of Dickens older and newer writing styles.
Overall, Great Expectations received near universal acclaim.
Not all reviews were favourable, however; Margaret Oliphant review, published May in Blackwood Magazine, vilified the novel.
Critics in the and centuries hailed it as one of Dickens greatest successes although often for conflicting reasons: GK Chesterton admired the novel optimism; Edmund Wilson its pessimism; Humphry House in emphasized its social context.
In Jerome H. Buckley saw it as bildungsroman, writing chapter on Dickens and two of his major protagonists (David Copperfield and Pip) in his book on the Bildungsroman in Victorian writing.
John Hillis Miller wrote in that Pip is the archetype of all Dickensian heroes.
In QD Leavis suggests "How We Must Read Great Expectations.
In Peter Brooks, in the wake of Jacques Derrida, offered deconstructionist reading.
The most profound analyst, according to Paul Schlicke, is probably Julian Moynahan, who, in essay surveying the hero guilt, made Orlick "Pip double, alter ego and dark mirror image."
Schlicke also names Anny Sadrin extensive study as the "most distinguished.
In the BBC polled book critics outside the UK about novels by British authors; they ranked Great Expectations fourth on the list of the Greatest British Novels.
Earlier, in its poll The Big Read concerning the reading taste of the British public, Great Expectations was voted out of the top novels chosen by survey participants.
Great Expectations single most obvious literary predecessor is Dickens earlier first person narrator protagonist David Copperfield.
The two novels trace the psychological and moral development of young boy to maturity, his transition from rural environment to the London metropolis, the vicissitudes of his emotional development, and the exhibition of his hopes and youthful dreams and their metamorphosis, through rich and complex first person narrative.
Dickens was conscious of this similarity and, before undertaking his new manuscript, reread David Copperfield to avoid repetition.
The two books both detail homecoming.
Although David Copperfield is based on much of Dickens personal experiences, Great Expectations provides, according to Paul Schlicke, "the more spiritual and intimate autobiography.
Even though several elements hint at the setting Miss Havisham, partly inspired by Parisian duchess, whose residence was always closed and in darkness, surrounded by "a dead green vegetable sea", recalling Satis House, nor specific time period, which is indicated by, among other elements, older coaches, the title "His Majesty" in reference to George III, and the old London Bridge prior to the reconstruction.
The theme of homecoming reflects events in Dickens life, several years prior to the publication of Great Expectations.
In he bought Gad Hill Place in Higham, Kent, which he had dreamed of living in as child, and moved there from faraway London two years later.
In in painful divorce, he separated from Catherine Dickens, his wife of twenty three years.
The divorce alienated him from some of his closest friends, such as Mark Lemon.
He quarrelled with Bradbury and Evans, who had published his novels for fifteen years.
In early September in field behind Gad Hill, Dickens burned almost all of his correspondence, sparing only letters on business matters.
He stopped publishing the weekly Household Words at the summit of its popularity and replaced it with All the Year Round.
The Uncommercial Traveller, short stories, and other texts Dickens began publishing in his new weekly in reflect his nostalgia, as seen in "Dullborough Town" and "Nurses' Stories".
According to Paul Schlicke, "it is hardly surprising that the novel Dickens wrote at this time was return to roots, set in the part of England in which he grew up, and in which he had recently resettled.
Margaret Cardwell draws attention to Chops the Dwarf from Dickens Christmas story "Going into Society", who, as the future Pip does, entertains the illusion of inheriting fortune and becomes disappointed upon achieving his social ambitions.
In another vein, Harry Stone thinks that Gothic and magical aspects of Great Expectations were partly inspired by Charles Mathews At Home, which was presented in detail in Household Words and its monthly supplement Household Narrative.
Stone also asserts that The Lazy Tour of Two Idle Apprentices, written in collaboration with Wilkie Collins after their walking tour of Cumberland during September and published in Household Words from to October of the same year, presents certain strange locations and passionate love, foreshadowing Great Expectations.
Beyond its biographical and literary aspects, Great Expectations appears, according to Robin Gilmour, as "a representative fable of the age".
Dickens was aware that the novel "speaks" to generation applying, at most, the principle of "self help" which was believed to have increased the order of daily life.
That the hero Pip aspires to improve, not through snobbery, but through the Victorian conviction of education, social refinement, and materialism, was seen as noble and worthy goal.
However, by tracing the origins of Pip "great expectations" to crime, deceit and even banishment to the colonies, Dickens unfavourably compares the new generation to the previous one of Joe Gargery, which Dickens portrays as less sophisticated but especially rooted in sound values, presenting an oblique criticism of his time.
The narrative structure of Great Expectations is influenced by the fact that it was first published as weekly episodes in periodical.
This required short chapters, centred on single subject, and an almost mathematical structure.
Pip story is told in three stages: his childhood and early youth in Kent, where he dreams of rising above his humble station; his time in London after receiving "great expectations"; and then finally his disillusionment on discovering the source of his fortune, followed by his slow realisation of the vanity of his false values.
These three stages are further divided into twelve parts of equal length.
This symmetry contributes to the impression of completion, which has often been commented on.
George Gissing, for example, when comparing Joe Gargery and Dan'l Peggotty (from David Copperfield), preferred the former, because he is stronger character, who lives "in world, not of melodrama, but of everyday cause and effect.
G. B. Shaw also commented on the novel structure, describing it as "compactly perfect", and Algernon Swinburne stated, "The defects in it are as nearly imperceptible as spots on the sun or shadow on sunlit sea.
contributing factor is "the briskness of the narrative tone.
Further, beyond the chronological sequences and the weaving of several storylines into tight plot, the sentimental setting and morality of the characters also create pattern.
The narrative structure of Great Expectations has two main elements: firstly that of "foster parents", Miss Havisham, Magwitch, and Joe, and secondly that of "young people", Estella, Pip and Biddy.
There is further organizing element that can be labelled "Dangerous Lovers", which includes Compeyson, Bentley Drummle and Orlick.
Pip is the centre of this web of love, rejection and hatred.
Dickens contrasts this "dangerous love" with the relationship of Biddy and Joe, which grows from friendship to marriage.
This is "the general frame of the novel".
The term "love" is generic, applying it to both Pip true love for Estella and the feelings Estella has for Drummle, which are based on desire for social advancement.
Similarly, Estella rejects Magwitch because of her contempt for everything that appears below what she believes to be her social status.
Great Expectations has an unhappy ending, since most characters suffer physically, psychologically or both, or die—often violently—while suffering.
Happy resolutions remain elusive, while hate thrives.
The only happy ending is Biddy and Joe marriage and the birth of their two children, since the final reconciliations, except that between Pip and Magwitch, do not alter the general order.
Though Pip extirpates the web of hatred, the first unpublished ending denies him happiness while Dickens' revised second ending, in the published novel, leaves his future uncertain.
Julian Monayhan argues that the reader can better understand Pip personality through analyzing his relationship with Orlick, the criminal laborer who works at Joe Gargery forge, than by looking at his relationship with Magwitch.
Pip and Biddy followed by Orlick (chapter by John McLenan
Following Monayhan, David Trotter notes that Orlick is Pip shadow.
Co workers in the forge, both find themselves at Miss Havisham, where Pip enters and joins the company, while Orlick, attending the door, stays out.
Pip considers Biddy sister; Orlick has other plans for her; Pip is connected to Magwitch, Orlick to Magwitch nemesis, Compeyson.
Orlick also aspires to "great expectations" and resents Pip ascension from the forge and the swamp to the glamour of Satis House, from which Orlick is excluded, along with London dazzling society.
Orlick is the cumbersome shadow Pip cannot remove.
Then comes Pip punishment, with Orlick savage attack on Mrs Gargery.
Thereafter Orlick vanishes, only to reappear in chapter in symbolic act, when he lures Pip into locked, abandoned building in the marshes.
Orlick has score to settle before going on to the ultimate act, murder.
However, Pip hampers Orlick, because of his privileged status, while Orlick remains slave of his condition, solely responsible for Mrs Gargery fate.
Dickens also uses Pip upper class counterpart, Bentley Drummle, "the double of double", according to Trotter, in similar way.
Like Orlick, Drummle is powerful, swarthy, unintelligible, hot blooded, and lounges and lurks, biding his time.
Estella rejects Pip for this rude, uncouth but well born man, and ends Pip hope.
Finally the lives of both Orlick and Drummle end violently.
Pip before Magwitch return, by John McLenan
Although the novel is written in first person, the reader knows—as an essential prerequisite—that Great Expectations is not an autobiography but novel, work of fiction with plot and characters, featuring narrator protagonist.
In addition, Sylvère Monod notes that the treatment of the autobiography differs from David Copperfield, as Great Expectations does not draw from events in Dickens life; "at most some traces of broad psychological and moral introspection can be found".
However, according to Paul Pickerel analysis, Pip—as both narrator and protagonist—recounts with hindsight the story of the young boy he was, who did not know the world beyond narrow geographic and familial environment.
The novel direction emerges from the confrontation between the two periods of time.
At first, the novel presents mistreated orphan, repeating situations from Oliver Twist and David Copperfield, but the trope is quickly overtaken.
The theme manifests itself when Pip discovers the existence of world beyond the marsh, the forge and the future Joe envisioned for him, the decisive moment when Miss Havisham and Estella enter his life.
This is red herring, as the decay of Satis House and the strange lady within signals the fragility of an impasse.
At this point, the reader knows more than the protagonist, creating dramatic irony that confers superiority that the narrator shares.
It is not until Magwitch return, plot twist that unites loosely connected plot elements and sets them into motion, that the protagonist point of view joins those of the narrator and the reader.
In this context of progressive revelation, the sensational events at the novel end serve to test the protagonist point of view.
Thus proceeds, in the words of E Dyson, "The Immolations of Pip".
Amongst the narrative devices that Dickens uses, according to Earle Davis, are caricature, comic speech mannerisms, intrigue, Gothic atmosphere, and central character who gradually changes.
Davis also mentions the close network of the structure and balance of contrasts, and praises the first person narration for providing simplicity that is appropriate for the story while avoiding melodrama.
Davis sees the symbolism attached to "great expectations" as reinforcing the novel impact.
Great Expectations contains the elements of variety of different literary genres, including the bildungsroman, gothic novel, crime novel, as well as comedy, melodrama and satire; and it belongs—like Wuthering Heights and the novels of Walter Scott—to the romance rather than realist tradition of the novel.
Complex and multifaceted, Great Expectations is Victorian bildungsroman, German literary genre from the eighteenth century, also called an initiatory tale.
This genre focuses on protagonist who matures over the course of the novel.
Great Expectations describes Pip initial frustration upon leaving home, followed by long and difficult period where he gradually matures.
This period in his life is punctuated with conflicts between his desires and the values of established order, that allow him to re evaluate his life and therefore re enter society on new foundations.
However, if viewed as primarily retrospective first person narrative, the novel differs from the two preceding pseudo autobiographies, David Copperfield and though only partially narrated in first person, Bleak House as it falls within several subgenres popular in Dickens' time, as noted by Paul Davis and Philip V.
Great Expectations contains many comic scenes and eccentric personalities, which play an integral part in both the plot and the theme.
Among the notable comic episodes are Pip Christmas dinner in chapter Wopsle Hamlet performance in chapter and Wemmick marriage in chapter .
Many of the characters have eccentricities: Jaggers with his punctilious lawyerly ways; the contrariness of his clerk, Wemmick, at work advising Pip to invest in "portable property", while in private living in cottage converted into castle; and the reclusive Miss Havisham in her decaying mansion, wearing her tattered bridal robes.
Jaggers asking Molly to show her scarred wrists, by John McLenan
Great Expectations incorporates elements of the new genre of crime fiction, which Dickens had already used in Oliver Twist and which was being developed by his friends Wilkie Collins and William Harrison Ainsworth.
With its scenes of convicts, prison ships, and episodes of bloody violence, Dickens creates characters worthy of the Newgate school of fiction.
Great Expectations contains elements of the Gothic genre, especially with Miss Havisham, the bride frozen in time, and the ruins of Satis House filled with weeds and spiders.
Other characters that can be linked to this genre include the aristocratic Bentley Drummle, because of his extreme cruelty, Pip himself, who spends his youth chasing frozen beauty, the monstrous Orlick, who systematically attempts to murder his employers.
Then there is the fight to the death between Compeyson and Magwitch, and the fire that ends up killing Miss Havisham, scenes that are dominated by horror, suspense, and the sensational, such as are found in gothic novels.
Elements of the silver fork novel are found in the character of Miss Havisham and her world, as well as Pip illusions.
This genre, which flourished in the and presents the flashy elegance and aesthetic frivolities found in high society.
In some respects, Dickens conceived Great Expectations as an anti silver fork novel, attacking Charles Lever novel Day Ride, publication of which began January in Household Words.
This can be seen in the way that Dickens satirises the pretensions and morals of Miss Havisham and her sycophants, including the Pockets (except Matthew), and Uncle Pumblechook.
George III guinea, gold coin worth shillings
Though Great Expectations is not obviously historical novel Dickens does emphasise differences between the time that the novel is set (c. and when it was written (–).
Great Expectations begins around (the date of Dickens' birth), continues until around and then jumps to around during which the Great Western Railway was built.
Though readers today will not notice this, Dickens uses various things to emphasise the differences between and this earlier period.
Among these details—that contemporary readers would have recognised—are the one pound note (in chapter that the Bank Notes Act had removed from circulation; likewise, the death penalty for deported felons who returned to Britain was abolished in .
The gallows erected in the swamps, designed to display rotting corpse, had disappeared by and George III, the monarch mentioned at the beginning, died in when Pip would have been seven or eight.
Miss Havisham paid Joe guineas, gold coins, when Pip was to begin his apprenticeship (in chapter guinea coins were slowly going out of circulation after the last new ones were struck with the face of George III in .
This also marks the historical period, as the one pound note was the official currency at the time of the novel publication.
Dickens placed the epilogue years after Magwitch death, which seems to be the time limit of the reported facts.
Collectively, the details suggest that Dickens identified with the main character.
If Pip is around toward the middle of the novel and at its end, he is roughly modeled after his creator who turned in .
The title "Expectations" refers to "a legacy to come", and thus immediately announces that money, or more specifically wealth plays an important part in the novel.
Some other major themes are crime, social class, including both gentility, and social alienation, imperialism and ambition.
The novel is also concerned with questions relating to conscience and moral regeneration, as well as redemption through love.
Dickens famously created comic and telling names for his characters, but in Great Expectations he goes further.
The first sentence of the novel establishes that Pip proper name is Philip Pirrip, which "my infant tongue could make of both names nothing longer or more explicit than Pip."
The name Philip Pirrip (or Pirrip) is never again used in the novel to refer to Pip, but exclusively to the exact wording of his father gravestone.
In Chapter when he receives his expectation from an anonymous benefactor, the first condition attached to it is "that you always bear the name of Pip."
In Chapter when Pip establishes his friendship with Herbert Pocket, he attempts to introduce himself as Philip.
Herbert immediately rejects the name ("'I don't take to Philip,' said he, smiling, 'for it sounds like moral boy out of the spelling book'") and decides to refer to Pip exclusively as Handel ("'Would you mind Handel for familiar name?
There charming piece of music by Handel, called the Harmonious Blacksmith.'").
The only other place he is referred to as Philip is in Chapter when he receives letter addressed to "Philip Pip" from his friend Wemmick, which says "DON'T GO HOME".
Pip name throughout binds him to his origins.
Mr Pumblechook: "And may I—May I—?
A central theme here, as in other of Dickens novels, is of people living as social outcasts.
The novel opening emphasises this in the case of the orphaned Pip, who lives in an isolated foggy environment next to graveyard, dangerous swamps, and prison ships.
His very existence reproaches him: "I was always treated as if had insisted on being born in opposition to the dictates of reason, religion and morality".
Pip feels excluded by society and this leads to his aggressive attitude towards it, as he tries to win his place within society through any means.
Various other characters behave similarly—that is, the oppressed become the oppressors.
Jaggers dominates Wemmick, who in turn dominates Jaggers clients.
Likewise, Magwitch uses Pip as an instrument of vengeance, as Miss Havisham also uses Estella.
However, hope exists despite Pip sense of exclusion because he is convinced that divine providence owes him place in society and that marriage to Estella is his destiny.
Therefore, when fortune comes his way, Pip shows no surprise, because he believes, that his value as human being, and his inherent nobility, have been recognized.
Thus Pip accepts Pumblechook flattery without blinking: "That boy is no common boy" and the "May I?
From Pip hope comes his "uncontrollable, impossible love for Estella", despite the humiliations to which she has subjected him.
For Pip, winning place in society also means winning Estella heart.
When the money secretly provided by Magwitch enables Pip to enter London society, two new related themes, wealth and gentility, are introduced.
Chapter outside Bartholomew Close, Jaggers threatening woman with shawl called Amelia, by F. A. Fraser
As the novel title implies money is theme of Great Expectations.
Central to this is the idea that wealth is only acceptable to the ruling class if it comes from the labour of others.
Miss Havisham wealth comes not from the sweat of her brow but from rent collected on properties she inherited from her father, brewer.
Her wealth is "pure", and her father profession as brewer does not contaminate it.
Herbert states in chapter that "while you cannot possibly be genteel and bake, you may be as genteel as never was and brew.
Because of her wealth, the old lady, despite her eccentricity, enjoys public esteem.
She remains in constant business relationship with her lawyer Jaggers and keeps tight grip over her "court" of sycophants, so that, far from representing social exclusion, she is the very image of powerful landed aristocracy that is frozen in the past and "embalmed in its own pride".
On the other hand, Magwitch wealth is socially unacceptable, firstly because he earned it, not through the efforts of others, but through his own hard work, and secondly because he was convict, and he earned it in penal colony.
It is argued that the contrast with Miss Havisham wealth is suggested symbolically.
Thus Magwitch money smells of sweat, and his money is greasy and crumpled: "two fat sweltering one pound notes that seemed to have been on terms of the warmest intimacy with all the cattle market in the country", while the coins Miss Havisham gives for Pip "indentures" shine as if new.
Further, it is argued Pip demonstrates his "good breeding", because when he discovers that he owes his transformation into "gentleman" to such contaminated windfall, he is repulsed in horror.
A. O. J. Cockshut, however, has suggested that there is no difference between Magwitch wealth and that of Miss Havisham.
Trotter emphasizes the importance of Magwitch greasy banknotes.
Beyond the Pip emotional reaction the notes reveal that Dickens' views on social and economic progress have changed in the years prior to the publication of Great Expectations.
His novels and Household Words extensively reflect Dickens' views, and, his efforts to contribute to social progress expanded in the .
To illustrate his point, he cites Humphry House who, succinctly, writes that in Pickwick Papers, "a bad smell was bad smell", whereas in Our Mutual Friend and Great Expectations, "it is problem".
Joe commenting on Pip good fortune, by John McLenan
At the time of The Great Exhibition of Dickens and Richard Henry Horne an editor of Household Words wrote an article comparing the British technology that created The Crystal Palace to the few artifacts exhibited by China: England represented an openness to worldwide trade and China isolationism.
To compare China and England is to compare Stoppage to Progress", they concluded.
According to Trotter, this was way to target the Tory government return to protectionism, which they felt would make England the China of Europe.
In fact, Household Words' May issue, championed international free trade, comparing the constant flow of money to the circulation of the blood.
Back in the Dickens believed in "genuine" wealth, which critic Trotter compares to fresh banknotes, crisp to the touch, pure and odorless.
With Great Expectations, Dickens views about wealth have changed.
However, though some sharp satire exists, no character in the novel has the role of the moralist that condemn Pip and his society.
In fact, even Joe and Biddy themselves, paragons of good sense, are complicit, through their exaggerated innate humility, in Pip social deviancy.
Dickens' moral judgement is first made through the way that he contrasts characters: only few characters keep to the straight and narrow path; Joe, whose values remain unchanged; Matthew Pocket whose pride renders him, to his family astonishment, unable to flatter his rich relatives; Jaggers, who keeps cool head and has no illusions about his clients; Biddy, who overcomes her shyness to, from time to time, bring order.
The narrator hero is left to draw the necessary conclusions: in the end, Pip finds the light and embarks on path of moral regeneration.
Herbert Pocket and Pip in London, by John McLenan
In London, neither wealth nor gentility brings happiness.
Pip, the apprentice gentleman constantly bemoans his anxiety, his feelings of insecurity, and multiple allusions to overwhelming chronic unease, to weariness, drown his enthusiasm (chapter ).
Wealth, in effect, eludes his control: the more he spends, the deeper he goes into debt to satisfy new needs, which were just as futile as his old ones.
His unusual path to gentility has the opposite effect to what he expected: infinite opportunities become available, certainly, but will power, in proportion, fades and paralyses the soul.
In the crowded metropolis, Pip grows disenchanted, disillusioned, and lonely.
Alienated from his native Kent, he has lost the support provided by the village blacksmith.
In London, he is powerless to join community, not the Pocket family, much less Jaggers circle.
London has become Pip prison and, like the convicts of his youth, he is bound in chains: "no Satis House can be built merely with money".
Do you take tea, or coffee, Mr Gargery?"
The idea of "good breeding" and what makes for "gentleman" other than money.
in other words "gentility", is central theme of Great Expectations.
The convict Magwitch covets it by proxy through Pip; Mrs Pocket dreams of acquiring it; it is also found in Pumblechook sycophancy; it is even seen in Joe, when he stammers between "Pip" and "Sir" during his visit to London, and when Biddy letters to Pip suddenly become reverent.
There are other characters who are associated with the idea of gentility like, for example, Miss Havisham seducer, Compeyson, the scarred face convict.
While Compeyson is corrupt, even Magwitch does not forget he is gentleman.
This also includes Estella, who ignores the fact that she is the daughter of Magwitch and another criminal.
There are couple of ways by which someone can acquire gentility, one being title, another family ties to the upper middle class.
Mrs Pocket bases every aspiration on the fact that her grandfather failed to be knighted, while Pip hopes that Miss Havisham will eventually adopt him, as adoption, as evidenced by Estella, who behaves like born and bred little lady, is acceptable.
But even more important, though not sufficient, are wealth and education.
Pip knows that and endorses it, as he hears from Jaggers through Matthew Pocket: "I was not designed for any profession, and should be well enough educated for my destiny if could hold my own with the average of young men in prosperous circumstances".
But neither the educated Matthew Pocket, nor Jaggers, who has earned his status solely through his intellect, can aspire to gentility.
Bentley Drummle, however, embodies the social ideal, so that Estella marries him without hesitation.
Another theme of Great Expectations is that Pip can undergo "moral regeneration."
In chapter the novel turning point, Magwitch visits Pip to see the gentleman he has made, and once the convict has hidden in Herbert Pocket room, Pip realises his situation:
Miss Havisham intentions towards me, all mere dream; Estella not designed for me ...
But, sharpest and deepest pain of all it was for the convict, guilty of knew not what crimes, and liable to be taken out of those rooms where sat thinking, and hanged at the Old Bailey door, that had deserted Joe.
To cope with his situation and his learning that he now needs Magwitch, hunted, injured man who traded his life for Pip.
Pip can only rely on the power of love for Estella Pip now goes through number of different stages each of which, is accompanied by successive realisations about the vanity of the prior certainties.
Joe learns to read by John McLenan
Pip problem is more psychological and moral than social.
Pip climbing of the social ladder upon gaining wealth is followed by corresponding degradation of his integrity.
Thus after his first visit in Miss Havisham, the innocent young boy from the marshes, suddenly turns into liar to dazzle his sister, Mrs Joe, and his Uncle Pumblechook with the tales of carriage and veal chops.
More disturbing is his fascination with Satis House –where he is despised and even slapped, beset by ghostly visions, rejected by the Pockets– and the gradual growth of the mirage of London.
The allure of wealth overpowers loyalty and gratitude, even conscience itself.
This is evidenced by the urge to buy Joe return, in chapter Pip haughty glance as Joe deciphers the alphabet, not to mention the condescending contempt he confesses to Biddy, copying Estella behaviour toward him.
Trabb boy mocks Pip in the village highstreet outside the post office by John McLenan
Pip represents, as do those he mimics, the bankruptcy of the "idea of the gentleman", and becomes the sole beneficiary of vulgarity, inversely proportional to his mounting gentility.
In chapter Dickens parodies the new disease that is corroding Pip moral values through the character "Trabb boy", who is the only one not to be fooled.
The boy parades through the main street of the village with boyish antics and contortions meant to satirically imitate Pip.
The gross, comic caricature openly exposes the hypocrisy of this new gentleman in frock coat and top hat.
Trabb boy reveals that appearance has taken precedence over being, protocol on feelings, decorum on authenticity; labels reign to the point of absurdity, and human solidarity is no longer the order of the day.
Mrs Pocket and her children indulging in idleness by Harry Furniss
Estella and Miss Havisham represent rich people who enjoy materially easier life but cannot cope with tougher reality.
Miss Havisham, like melodramatic heroine, withdrew from life at the first sign of hardship.
Estella, excessively spoiled and pampered, sorely lacks judgement and falls prey to the first gentleman who approaches her, though he is the worst.
Estella marriage to such brute demonstrates the failure of her education.
Estella is used to dominating but becomes victim to her own vice, brought to her level by man born, in her image.
Dickens uses imagery to reinforce his ideas and London, the paradise of the rich and of the ideal of the gentleman, has mounds of filth, it is crooked, decrepit, and greasy, dark desert of bricks, soot, rain, and fog.
The surviving vegetation is stunted, and confined to fenced off paths, without air or light.
Barnard Inn, where Pip lodges, offers mediocre food and service while the rooms, despite the furnishing provided, as Suhamy states, "for the money", is most uncomfortable, far cry from Joe large kitchen, radiating hearth, and his well stocked pantry.
Likewise, such world, dominated by the lure of money and social prejudice, also leads to the warping of people and morals, to family discord and war between man and woman.
In contrast to London corruption stands Joe, despite his intellectual and social limitations, in whom the values of the heart prevail and who has natural wisdom.
Magwitch arrest after his capture on the Thames while trying escape to France, by John McLenan
Another important theme is Pip sense of guilt, which he has felt from an early age.
After the encounter with the convict Magwitch, Pip is afraid that someone will find out about his crime and arrest him.
The theme of guilt comes into even greater effect when Pip discovers that his benefactor is convict.
Pip has an internal struggle with his conscience throughout Great Expectations, hence the long and painful process of redemption that he undergoes.
Pip moral regeneration is true pilgrimage punctuated by suffering.
Like Christian in Bunyan The Pilgrim Progress, Pip makes his way up to light through maze of horrors that afflict his body as well as his mind.
This includes the burns he suffers from saving Miss Havisham from the fire; the illness that requires months of recovery; the threat of violent death at Orlick hands; debt, and worse, the obligation of having to repay them; hard work, which he recognises as the only worthy source of income, hence his return to Joe forge.
Even more important, is his accepting of Magwitch, coarse outcast of society.
Dickens makes use of symbolism, in chapter to emphasise Pip moral regeneration.
As he prepares to go down the Thames to rescue the convict, veil lifted from the river and Pip spirit.
Symbolically the fog which enveloped the marshes as Pip left for London has finally lifted, and he feels ready to become man.
As looked along the clustered roofs, with Church towers and spires shooting into the unusually clear air, the sun rose up, and veil seemed to be drawn from the river, and millions of sparkles burst out upon its waters.
From me too, veil seemed to be drawn, and felt strong and well.
Pip is redeemed by love, that, for Dickens as for generations of Christian moralists, is only acquired through sacrifice.
Pip reluctance completely disappears and he embraces Magwitch.
After this, Pip loyalty remains foolproof, during imprisonment, trial, and death of the convict.
He grows selfless and his "expectations" are confiscated by the Crown.
Moments before Magwitch death, Pip reveals that Estella, Magwitch daughter, is alive, "a lady and very beautiful.
Here the greatest sacrifice: the recognition that he owes everything, even Estella, to Magwitch; his new debt becomes his greatest freedom.
Pip returns to the forge, his previous state and to meaningful work.
The philosophy expressed here by Dickens that of person happy with their contribution to the welfare of society, is in line with Thomas Carlyle theories and his condemnation, in Latter Day Pamphlets the system of social classes flourishing in idleness, much like Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels did.
Dickens' hero is neither an aristocrat nor capitalist but working class boy.
In Great Expectations, the true values are childhood, youth, and heart.
The heroes of the story are the young Pip, true visionary, and still developing person, open, sensible, who is persecuted by soulless adults.
Then the adolescent Pip and Herbert, imperfect but free, intact, playful, endowed with fantasy in boring and frivolous world.
Magwitch is also positive figure, man of heart, victim of false appearances and of social images, formidable and humble, bestial but pure, vagabond of God, despised by men.
There is also Pip affectional friend Joe, the enemy of the lie.
Finally, there are women like Biddy.
Edward W. Said, in his work Culture and Imperialism, interprets Great Expectations in terms of postcolonial theory about of late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries British imperialism.
Pip disillusionment when he learns his benefactor is an escaped convict from Australia, along with his acceptance of Magwitch as surrogate father, is described by Said as part of "the imperial process", that is the way colonialism exploits the weaker members of society.
Thus the British trading post in Cairo legitimatises Pip work as clerk, but the money earned by Magwitch honest labour is illegitimate, because Australia is penal colony, and Magwitch is forbidden to return to Britain.
Said states that Dickens has Magwitch return to be redeemed by Pip love, paving the way for Pip own redemption, but despite this moral message, the book still reinforces standards that support the authority of the British empire.
Said interpretation suggests that Dickens' attitude backs Britain exploitation of Middle East "through trade and travel", and that Great Expectations affirms the idea of keeping the Empire and its peoples in their place—at the exploitable margins of British society.
However, the novel Gothic, and Romance genre elements, challenge Said assumption that Great Expectations is realist novel like Daniel Defoe Robinson Crusoe.
Dickens novel has influenced number of writers, Sue Roe Estella: Her Expectations for example explores the inner life of an Estella fascinated with Havisham figure.
Miss Havisham is again important in Havisham: Novel a book by Ronald Frame, that features an imagining of the life of Miss Catherine Havisham from childhood to adulthood.
The second chapter of Rosalind Ashe Literary Houses paraphrases Miss Havisham story with details about the nature and structure of Satis House and coloured imaginings of the house within.
Miss Havisham is also central to Lost in Good Book Jasper Fforde alternate history, fantasy novel, which features parody of Miss Havisham.
It won the Independent Mystery Booksellers Association Dilys Award.
Magwitch is the protagonist of Peter Carey Jack Maggs, which is re imagining of Magwitch return to England, with the addition, among other things, of fictionalised Dickens character and plot line.
Carey novel won the Commonwealth Writers Prize in .
Mister Pip is novel by Lloyd Jones, New Zealand author.
The winner of the Commonwealth Writers' Prize, Lloyd Jones novel is set in village on the Papua New Guinea island of Bougainville during brutal civil war there in the where the young protagonist life is impacted in major way by her reading of Great Expectations.
In May Udon Entertainment Manga Classics line published Manga adaptation of Great Expectations.
Like many other Dickens novels, Great Expectations has been filmed for the cinema or television and adapted for the stage numerous times.
The film adaptation in gained the greatest acclaim.
The story is often staged, and less often produced as musical.
The stage play and the film that followed from that stage production did not include the character Orlick and ends the story when the characters are still young adults.
That character has been excluded in many televised adaptations made since the movie by David Lean.
Following are highlights of the adaptations for film and television, and for the stage, since the early century.
Great Expectations, silent film, starring Jack Pickford, directed by Robert G. Vignola.
Silent film, and the first adaptation not in English, made in Denmark, starring Martin Herzberg, directed by A. W.
Great Expectations film starring Phillips Holmes and Jane Wyatt, directed by Stuart Walker.
Great Expectations, the most celebrated film version, starring John Mills as Pip, Bernard Miles as Joe, Alec Guinness as Herbert, Finlay Currie as Magwitch, Martita Hunt as Miss Havisham, Anthony Wager as Young Pip, Jean Simmons as Young Estella and Valerie Hobson as the adult Estella, directed by David Lean.
It came fifth in BFI poll of the top British films.
the first television adaptation shown as two part television version starring Roddy McDowall as Pip and Estelle Winwood as Miss Havisham.
It aired as an episode of the show Robert Montgomery Presents.
BBC television version aired in parts, starring Dinsdale Landen as Pip, Helen Lindsay as Estella, Colin Jeavons as Herbert Pocket, Marjorie Hawtrey as Miss Havisham and Derek Benfield as Landlord.
BBC television serial starring Gary Bond as Pip and Francesca Annis.
BBC issued the series on DVD in .
Great Expectations a film starring Michael York as Pip and Simon Gipps Kent as Young Pip, Sarah Miles and James Mason, directed by Joseph Hardy.
Great Expectations a BBC serial starring Stratford Johns, Gerry Sundquist, Joan Hickson, Patsy Kensit and Sarah Jane Varley.
Produced by Barry Letts, and directed by Julian Amyes.
an animated version, starring Phillip Hinton, Liz Horne, Robin Stewart and Bill Kerr, adapted by Alexander Buzo.
Great Expectations, Disney Channel two part film starring Anthony Hopkins as Magwitch, John Rhys Davies as Joe Gargery, and Jean Simmons as Miss Havisham, directed by Kevin Connor.
Great Expectations, film starring Ethan Hawke and Gwyneth Paltrow, directed by Alfonso Cuarón.
This adaptation is set in contemporary New York, and renames Pip to Finn and Miss Havisham to Nora Dinsmoor.
The film score was composed by Patrick Doyle.
Great Expectations, film starring Ioan Gruffudd as Pip, Justine Waddell as Estella, and Charlotte Rampling as Miss Havisham (Masterpiece Theatre—TV)
Pip, an episode of the television show South Park, starring Matt Stone as Pip, Eliza Schneider as Estella, and Trey Parker as Miss Havisham.
Great Expectations, three part BBC serial.
Starring Ray Winstone as Magwitch, Gillian Anderson as Miss Havisham and Douglas Booth as Pip.
Great Expectations, film directed by Mike Newell, starring Ralph Fiennes as Magwitch, Helena Bonham Carter as Miss Havisham and Jeremy Irvine as Pip.
Fitoor, film adaptation by Abishek Kapoor, starring Aditya Roy Kapoor and Katrina Kaif.
adaptation made by Alec Guinness and staged at Rudolf Steiner Hall, which was to influence David Lean film, in which both Guinness and Martita Hunt reprised their stage roles.
Music by Cyril Ornadel, lyrics by Hal Shaper, starring Sir John Mills.
Ivor Novello Award for Best British Musical.
Glasgow Mayfest, stage version by the Tag Theatre Company in association with the Gregory Nash group, adapted by John Clifford; the cast included young Alan Cumming and the staging included dance, and it was success.
Stage adaptation of Great Expectations at Dublin Gate Theatre by Hugh Leonard.
Melbourne Theatre Company four hour re telling, in an adaptation by company director Simon Phillips.
Royal Shakespeare Company adaptation by the Cheek by Jowl founders Declan Donnellan and Nick Ormerod, with Sian Phillips as Miss Havisham
West End adaptation written by Jo Clifford and directed by Graham McLaren.
Paula Wilcox as Miss Havisham, Chris Ellison as Magwitch.
This was revival of the adaptation, without dance.
This play was filmed in .
Dundee Repertory Theatre adaptation written by Jo Clifford and directed by Jemima Levick.
West Yorkshire Playhouse adaptation written by Michael Eaton and directed by Lucy Bailey.
Starring Jane Asher as Miss Havisham.
Bleak House alternates between third person narrator and first person narrator, Esther Summerson, but the former is predominant.
Nineteen double sheets folded in half: on the left, names, incidents, and expressions; on the right, sections of the current chapter.
George Gissing wrote: "Great Expectations would be nearly perfect in its mechanism but for the unhappy deference to Lord Lytton judgment, which caused the end to be altered.
Dickens meant to have left Pip lonely man, and of course rightly so; by the irony of fate he was induced to spoil his work through brother novelist desire for happy ending, strange thing, indeed, to befall Dickens."
In Great Expectations, only London is named, along with its neighbourhoods and surrounding communities.
Original quote in French: "un monde que dominent l'appât de l'argent et les préjugés sociaux conduit la mutilation de l'être, aux discordes de famille, la guerre entre homme et femme, et ne saurait conduire quelque bonheur que ce soit".
Both Marx and Engels condemned the rejection of Carlyle democratic system but agreed that the aristocracy remains the dominant class.
Original text in French: "vagabond de Dieu honni des hommes, lépreux porteur de la bonne nouvelle"
Cairo was of course not British colony at this time, though Egypt became British Protectorate in the
