Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde is gothic novella by Scottish author Robert Louis Stevenson, first published in .
The work is also known as The Strange Case of Jekyll Hyde, Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde, or simply Jekyll Hyde.
The novella impact is such that it has become part of the language, with the phrase "Jekyll and Hyde" entering the vernacular to refer to people with an unpredictably dual nature: usually very good, but sometimes shockingly evil.
Scottish nationalism vs union with Britain
The stage version of Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
Stevenson had long been intrigued by the idea of how human personalities can affect how to incorporate the interplay of good and evil into story.
While still teenager, he developed script for play about Deacon Brodie, which he later reworked with the help of W. E. Henley and which was produced for the first time in .
In early he wrote the short story "Markheim", which he revised in for publication in Christmas annual.
According to his essay, "A Chapter on Dreams" (Scribner, Jan. he racked his brains for an idea for story and had dream, and upon wakening had the intuition for two or three scenes that would appear in the story Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.
Biographer Graham Balfour quoted Stevenson wife Fanny Stevenson: In the small hours of one morning,I was awakened by cries of horror from Louis.
Thinking he had nightmare, awakened him.
He said angrily: "Why did you wake me?
I was dreaming fine bogey tale."
I had awakened him at the first transformation scene.
Lloyd Osbourne, Stevenson stepson, wrote: "I don't believe that there was ever such literary feat before as the writing of Dr Jekyll.
I remember the first reading as though it were yesterday.
Louis came downstairs in fever; read nearly half the book aloud; and then, while we were still gasping, he was away again, and busy writing.
I doubt if the first draft took so long as three days.
Inspiration may also have come from the writer friendship with Edinburgh based French teacher Eugene Chantrelle, who was convicted and executed for the murder of his wife in May .
Chantrelle, who had appeared to lead normal life in the city, poisoned his wife with opium.
According to author Jeremy Hodges, Stevenson was present throughout the trial and as "the evidence unfolded he found himself, like Dr Jekyll, 'aghast before the acts of Edward Hyde'."
Moreover, it was believed that the teacher had committed other murders both in France and Britain by poisoning his victims at supper parties with "favourite dish of toasted cheese and opium".
Louis Vivet, mental patient who was suffering from dissociative identity disorder, caught Frederic W. H. Myers attention and he wrote to Stevenson after the story was published.
Stevenson was polite in his response but rejected that reading.
As was customary, Mrs Stevenson would read the draft and offer her criticisms in the margins.
Robert Stevenson was confined to bed at the time from haemorrhage.
Therefore, she left her comments with the manuscript and Robert in the toilet.
She said that in effect the story was really an allegory, but Robert was writing it as story.
After while, Robert called her back into the bedroom and pointed to pile of ashes: he had burnt the manuscript in fear that he would try to salvage it, and in the process forced himself to start again from nothing, writing an allegorical story as she had suggested.
Scholars debate whether he really burnt his manuscript; there is no direct factual evidence for the burning, but it remains an integral part of the history of the novella.
Stevenson re wrote the story in three to six days.
A number of later biographers have alleged that Stevenson was on drugs during the frantic re write; for example, William Gray revisionist history Literary Life said he used cocaine while other biographers said he used ergot.
However, the standard history, according to the accounts of his wife and son (and himself), says he was bed ridden and sick while writing it.
According to Osbourne, "The mere physical feat was tremendous and, instead of harming him, it roused and cheered him inexpressibly".
He continued to refine the work for four to six weeks after the initial re write.
The novella was written in the southern English seaside town of Bournemouth, where Stevenson had moved due to ill health, to benefit from its sea air and warmer southern climate.
The name Jekyll was borrowed from Reverend Walter Jekyll, friend of Stevenson and younger brother of horticulturalist and landscape designer Gertrude Jekyll.
Gabriel John Utterson and his cousin Richard Enfield reach the door of large house on their weekly walk.
Enfield tells Utterson that months ago he saw sinister looking man named Edward Hyde trample young girl after accidentally bumping into her.
Enfield forced Hyde to pay to avoid scandal.
Hyde brought them to this door and provided cheque signed by reputable gentleman (later revealed to be Doctor Henry Jekyll, friend and client of Utterson).
Utterson is disturbed because Jekyll recently changed his will to make Hyde the sole beneficiary.
Utterson fears that Hyde is blackmailing Jekyll.
When Utterson tries to discuss Hyde with Jekyll, Jekyll turns pale and asks that Hyde be left alone.
One night in October, servant sees Hyde beat to death Sir Danvers Carew, another of Utterson clients.
The police contact Utterson, who leads officers to Hyde apartment.
Hyde has vanished, but they find half of broken cane.
Utterson recognizes the cane as one he had given to Jekyll.
Utterson visits Jekyll, who shows Utterson note, allegedly written to Jekyll by Hyde, apologising for the trouble that he has caused.
However, Hyde handwriting is similar to Jekyll own, leading Utterson to conclude that Jekyll forged the note to protect Hyde.
For two months, Jekyll reverts to his former sociable manner, but in early January, he starts refusing visitors.
Dr Hastie Lanyon, mutual acquaintance of Jekyll and Utterson, dies of shock after receiving information relating to Jekyll.
Before his death, Lanyon gives Utterson letter to be opened after Jekyll death or disappearance.
In late February, during another walk with Enfield, Utterson starts conversation with Jekyll at window of his laboratory.
Jekyll suddenly slams the window and disappears.
In early March, Jekyll butler, Mr. Poole, visits Utterson and says Jekyll has secluded himself in his laboratory for weeks.
Utterson and Poole break into the laboratory, where they find Hyde wearing Jekyll clothes and apparently dead from suicide.
They find letter from Jekyll to Utterson.
Utterson reads Lanyon letter, then Jekyll.
Lanyon letter reveals his deterioration resulted from the shock of seeing Hyde drink serum that turned him into Jekyll.
Jekyll letter explains that he had indulged in unstated vices and feared discovery.
He found way to transform himself and thereby indulge his vices without fear of detection.
Jekyll transformed personality, Hyde, was evil, self indulgent, and uncaring to anyone but himself.
Initially, Jekyll controlled the transformations with the serum, but one night in August, he became Hyde involuntarily in his sleep.
Jekyll resolved to cease becoming Hyde.
One night, he had moment of weakness and drank the serum.
Hyde, furious at having been caged for so long, killed Carew.
Horrified, Jekyll tried more adamantly to stop the transformations.
Then, in early January, he transformed involuntarily while awake.
Far from his laboratory and hunted by the police as murderer, Hyde needed help to avoid capture.
He wrote to Lanyon (in Jekyll hand), asking his friend to bring chemicals from his laboratory.
In Lanyon presence, Hyde mixed the chemicals, drank the serum, and transformed into Jekyll.
The shock of the sight instigated Lanyon deterioration and death.
Meanwhile, Jekyll involuntary transformations increased in frequency and required ever larger doses of serum to reverse.
It was one of these transformations that caused Jekyll to slam his window shut on Enfield and Utterson.
Eventually, one of the chemicals used in the serum ran low, and subsequent batches prepared from new stocks failed to work.
Jekyll speculated that one of the original ingredients must have some unknown impurity that made it work.
Realizing that he would stay transformed as Hyde, Jekyll decided to write his "confession".
He ended the letter by writing, "I bring the life of that unhappy Henry Jekyll to an end."
With these words, both the document and the novella come to close.
This section does not cite any sources.
Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
December (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Gabriel John Utterson, lawyer and loyal friend of Jekyll and Lanyon, is the main protagonist of the story.
Utterson is measured and at all times emotionless, bachelor who nonetheless seems believable, trustworthy, tolerant of the faults of others, and indeed genuinely likable.
Utterson has been close friends with Lanyon and Jekyll.
However, Utterson is not immune to guilt, as, while he is quick to investigate and judge the faults of others even for the benefit of his friends, Stevenson states that "he was humbled to the dust by the many ill things he had done".
Whatever these "ill things" may be, he does not partake in gossip or other views of the upper class out of respect for his fellow man.
Often the last remaining friend of the down falling, he finds an interest in others' downfalls, which creates spark of interest not only in Jekyll but also regarding Hyde.
He comes to the conclusion that human downfall results from indulging oneself in topics of interest.
As result of this line of reasoning, he lives life as recluse and "dampens his taste for the finer items of life".
Utterson concludes that Jekyll lives life as he wishes by enjoying his occupation.
Utterson is good, kind, loyal and honest friend to Henry Jekyll.
Main article: Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (character)
Jekyll depicted on edition book cover
Dr Jekyll is "large, well made, smooth faced man of fifty with something of slyish cast", who occasionally feels he is battling between the good and evil within himself, upon leading to the struggle between his dual personalities of Henry Jekyll and Edward Hyde.
He has spent great part of his life trying to repress evil urges that were not fitting for man of his stature.
He creates serum, or potion, in an attempt to mask this hidden evil within his personality.
However, in doing so, Jekyll transformed into the smaller, younger, cruel, remorseless, evil Hyde.
Jekyll has many friends and an amiable personality, but as Hyde, he becomes mysterious and violent.
As time goes by, Hyde grows in power.
After taking the potion repeatedly, he no longer relies upon it to unleash his inner demon, i.e., his alter ego.
Eventually, Hyde grows so strong that Jekyll becomes reliant on the potion to remain conscious.
Richard Enfield is Utterson cousin and is well known "man about town."
He first sees Hyde at about three in the morning in an episode that is well documented as Hyde is running over little girl.
He is the person who mentions to Utterson the actual personality of Jekyll friend, Hyde.
Enfield witnessed Hyde running over little girl in the street recklessly, and the group of witnesses, with the girl parents and other residents, force Hyde into writing cheque for the girl family.
Enfield discovers that Jekyll signed the cheque, which is genuine.
He says that Hyde is disgusting looking but finds himself stumped when asked to describe the man..
A longtime friend of Jekyll, Hastie Lanyon disagrees with Jekyll "scientific" concepts, which Lanyon describes as "...too fanciful".
He is the first person to discover Hyde true identity (Hyde transforms himself back into Jekyll in Lanyon presence).
Lanyon helps Utterson solve the case when he describes the letter given to him by Jekyll and his thoughts and reactions to the transformation.
When Lanyon witnesses the transformation process (and subsequently hears Jekyll private confession, made to him alone), Lanyon becomes critically ill and later dies of shock.
Poole is Jekyll butler who has lived with him for many years.
Upon noticing the reclusiveness and changes of his master, Poole goes to Utterson with the fear that his master has been murdered and his murderer, Mr Hyde, is residing in the chambers.
Poole serves Jekyll faithfully and attempts to do good job and be loyal to his master.
Yet events finally drive him into joining forces with Utterson to find the truth.
Utterson joins this Scotland Yard inspector after the murder of Sir Danvers Carew.
They explore Hyde loft in Soho and discover evidence of his depraved life.
A kind, white haired old man and Member of Parliament.
The maid claims that Hyde, in murderous rage, killed Carew in the streets of London on the night of October (sometime between pm and am by the testimony of the maid).
At the time of his death, Carew is years old and is carrying on his person letter addressed to Utterson, and they find one half of one of Jekyll walking sticks on his body.
As result, they later go and investigate in Jekyll house, but cannot find him; they later enter house where Hyde has been living and find the other half of the stick in one of Hyde rooms.
A maid, whose employer Hyde had once visited, is the only person who claims to have witnessed the murder of Sir Danvers Carew.
She states that she saw Hyde murder Carew with Jekyll cane and his feet.
Having fainted after seeing what happened, she then wakes up and rushes to the police, thus initiating the murder case of Sir Danvers Carew.
Richard Mansfield was mostly known for his dual role depicted in this double exposure.
The stage adaptation opened in Boston in a year after the publication of the novella.
Literary genres that critics have applied as framework for interpreting the novel include religious allegory, fable, detective story, sensation fiction, Doppelgänger literature, Scottish devil tales, and gothic novel.
The novella is frequently interpreted as an examination of the duality of human nature, usually expressed as an inner struggle between good and evil, with variations such as human versus animal, civilization versus barbarism sometimes substituted, the main thrust being that of an essential inner struggle between the one and other, and that the failure to accept this tension results in evil, or barbarity, or animal violence, being projected onto others.
In Freudian theory, the thoughts and desires banished to the unconscious mind motivate the behaviour of the conscious mind.
Banishing evil to the unconscious mind in an attempt to achieve perfect goodness can result in the development of Mr Hyde type aspect to one character.
In Christian theology, Satan fall from Heaven is due to his refusal to accept that he is created being (that he has dual nature) and is not God.
This idea is suggested when Hyde says to Lanyon, shortly before drinking the famous potion, "...and your sight shall be blasted by prodigy to stagger the unbelief of Satan."
This is because in Christianity, pride (to consider oneself as without sin or without evil) is sin, as it is the precursor to evil itself.
In his discussion of the novel, Vladimir Nabokov argues that the "good versus evil" view of the novel is misleading, as Jekyll himself is not, by Victorian standards, morally good person in some cases.
The work is commonly associated today with the Victorian concern over the public and private division, the individual sense of playing part and the class division of London.
In this respect, the novella has also been noted as "one of the best guidebooks of the Victorian era" because of its piercing description of the fundamental dichotomy of the century "outward respectability and inward lust", as this period had tendency for social hypocrisy.
Scottish nationalism vs union with Britain
Another common interpretation sees the novella duality as representative of Scotland and the Scottish character.
In this reading, the duality represents the national and linguistic dualities inherent in Scotland relationship with the wider Britain and the English language, respectively, and also the repressive effects of the Church of Scotland on the Scottish character.
further parallel is also drawn with the city of Edinburgh itself, Stevenson birthplace, which consists of two distinct parts: the old medieval section historically inhabited by the city poor, where the dark crowded slums were rife with all types of crime, and the modern Georgian area of wide spacious streets representing respectability.
The book was initially sold as paperback for one shilling in the UK and for one dollar in the U.S.
These books were called "shilling shockers" or penny dreadfuls.
The American publisher issued the book on January four days before the first appearance of the UK edition issued by Longmans; Scribner published copies, only of them bound in cloth.
Initially, stores did not stock it until review appeared in The Times on January giving it favourable reception.
Within the next six months, close to forty thousand copies were sold.
As Stevenson biographer Graham Balfour wrote in the book success was probably due rather to the "moral instincts of the public" than to any conscious perception of the merits of its art.
It was read by those who never read fiction and quoted in pulpit sermons and in religious papers.
By it was estimated to have sold over copies in the United States.
The stage version of Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
Although the book had initially been published as "shilling shocker", it was an immediate success and one of Stevenson best selling works.
Stage adaptations began in Boston and London and soon moved all across England and then towards his home country of Scotland.
The first stage adaptation followed the story initial publication in .
Richard Mansfield bought the rights from Stevenson and worked with Boston author Thomas Russell Sullivan to write script.
The resulting play added to the cast of characters and some elements of romance to the plot.
Addition of female characters to the originally male centered plot continued in later adaptations of the story.
The first performance of the play took place in the Boston Museum in May .
The lighting effects and makeup for Jekyll transformation into Hyde created horrified reactions from the audience, and the play was so successful that production followed in London.
After successful ten weeks in London in Mansfield was forced to close down production.
The hysteria surrounding the Jack the Ripper serial murders led even those who only played murderers on stage to be considered suspects.
When Mansfield was mentioned in London newspapers as possible suspect for the crimes, he shut down production.
Main article: Adaptations of Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
There have been numerous adaptations of the novella including over stage and film versions alone.
There have also been many audio recordings of the novella, with some of the more famous readers including Tom Baker, Roger Rees, Christopher Lee, Anthony Quayle, Martin Jarvis, Tim Pigott Smith, John Hurt, Ian Holm, Gene Lockhart and Richard Armitage.
A musical was created by Frank Wildhorn, Steve Cuden, and Leslie Bricusse: "Jekyll Hyde: The Gothic Musical Thriller The Complete Work" .
S. G. Hulme Beaman illustrated edition, and in Mervyn Peake provided the newly founded Folio Society with memorable illustrations for the story.
