The Adventures of Tom Sawyer by Mark Twain is an novel about young boy growing up along the Mississippi River.
It is set in the in the fictional town of St. Petersburg, inspired by Hannibal, Missouri, where Twain lived as boy.
In the novel Tom Sawyer has several adventures, often with his friend, Huckleberry Finn.
Originally commercial failure, the book ended up being the best selling of any of Twain works during his lifetime.
Although The Adventures of Tom Sawyer is sometimes overshadowed by its sequel, Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, the book is considered masterpiece of American literature, and was one of the first novels to be written on typewriter.
Sequels and other works featuring Tom Sawyer
Tom Sawyer, UScommemorative stamp of showing the whitewashed fence.
Tom and Becky lost in the caves.
Illustration from the edition by artist True Williams.
Tom Sawyer, an orphan, lives with his Aunt Polly and his half brother Sid in the fictional town of St. Petersburg, Missouri sometime in the .
A fun loving boy, Tom skips school to go swimming and is made to whitewash his aunt fence for the entirety of the next day, Saturday, as punishment.
In one of the most famous scenes in American literature, Tom cleverly persuades the various neighborhood children to trade him small trinkets and treasures for the "privilege" of doing his tedious work, using reverse psychology to convince them it is an enjoyable activity.
Tom later trades the trinkets with other students for various denominations of tickets, obtained at the local Sunday school for memorizing verses of Scripture; he cashes these in to the minister in order to win much coveted Bible offered to studious children as prize, despite being one of the worst students in the Sunday school and knowing almost nothing of Scripture, eliciting envy from the students and mixture of pride and shock from the adults.
Tom falls in love with Becky Thatcher, new girl in town and the daughter of prominent judge.
Tom wins the admiration of the judge in church by obtaining the Bible as prize, but reveals his ignorance when he cannot answer basic questions about Scripture.
Tom pursues Becky, eventually persuading her to get "engaged" by kissing him.
However, their romance soon collapses when she learns that Tom had been previously "engaged" to another schoolgirl, Amy Lawrence, and that Becky was not his first girlfriend.
Shortly after Becky shuns him, Tom accompanies Huckleberry Finn, vagrant boy whom all the other boys admire, to graveyard at midnight to perform superstitious ritual designed to heal warts.
At the graveyard, they witness trio of body snatchers, Dr. Robinson, Muff Potter, and Injun Joe, robbing grave.
Muff Potter is drunk and eventually blacks out, while Injun Joe gets into fight with Dr. Robinson and murders him.
Injun Joe then appears to frame Muff Potter for the murder.
Tom and Huckleberry Finn swear blood oath not to tell anyone about the murder, fearing Injun Joe would somehow discover it was them and murder them in turn.
Muff Potter is eventually jailed, assuming he committed the killing in an act of drunkenness and accepting of his guilt and fate.
Tom grows bored by school, and along with his best friend Joe Harper and Huckleberry Finn, they run away to Jackson Island in the Mississippi river to begin life as "pirates."
While enjoying their new found freedom, they become aware that the community is sounding the river for their bodies, as the boys are missing and presumed dead.
Tom sneaks back home one night to observe the commotion, and after brief moment of remorse at his loved ones' suffering, he is struck by the grand idea of appearing at his own funeral.
The trio later carries out this scheme, making sensational and sudden appearance at church in the middle of their joint funeral service, winning the immense respect of their classmates for the stunt.
Back in school, Tom regains Becky favor after he nobly accepts the blame and caning punishment for book she has ripped.
In court, Injun Joe pins the murder on Muff Potter, although Tom and Huckleberry Finn know he is innocent.
At Potter trial, Tom decides to defy his blood oath with Huck and speaks out against Injun Joe, who quickly escapes through window before he can be apprehended.
Henceforth, the boys live in constant fear of Joe revenge on them for incriminating him.
Summer arrives, and Tom and Huck decide to hunt for buried treasure in haunted house.
After venturing upstairs, they hear noise below, and peering through holes in the floor, they see the deaf mute Spaniard who had showed up in the village some weeks before reveal himself to be Injun Joe.
Speaking freely, Injun Joe and companion plan to bury some stolen treasure of their own in the house.
From their hiding spot, Tom and Huck wriggle with delight at the prospect of digging it up.
However, by chance, the villains discover an even greater gold hoard buried in the hearth, and carry it off to better secret hiding place.
The boys are determined to find where it has gone, and one night, Huck spots them and follows them.
He overhears Injun Joe plans to break into the house of the wealthy Widow Douglas and mutilate her face, an act of revenge for her late husband, justice of the peace, having once ordered him to be publicly whipped for vagrancy.
Running to fetch help, Huck prevents the crime and requests his name not be made public, for fear of Injun Joe retaliation, thus becoming an anonymous hero.
In the meantime, Tom goes on picnic to McDougal Cave with Becky and their classmates.
However, Tom and Becky get lost and end up wandering in the extensive cave complex for the several days, facing starvation and dehydration.
Becky becomes extremely dehydrated and weak, and Tom search for way out grows more desperate.
He accidentally encounters Injun Joe in the caves one day, but is not seen by his nemesis.
Eventually, Tom finds way out, and they are joyfully welcomed back by their community.
As preventive measure, Judge Thatcher, Becky father, has McDougal Cave sealed off with an iron door.
When Tom hears of the sealing two weeks later, he is horror stricken, knowing that Injun Joe is still inside.
He directs posse to the cave, where they find Injun Joe corpse just inside the sealed entrance, starved to death after having desperately consumed raw bats and candle stubs as last resort.
The place of his death, and specifically the in situ cup he used to collect water from dripping stalactite, becomes local tourist attraction.
Tom and others in the town feel pity at the horribly cruel death, despite Injun Joe wickedness, and petition is started to the governor to posthumously pardon him.
A week later, having deduced from Injun Joe presence at McDougal Cave that the villain must have hidden the stolen gold inside, Tom takes Huck to the cave and they find the box of gold, the proceeds of which are invested for them.
The Widow Douglas adopts Huck, but he finds the restrictions of civilized home life painful, attempting to escape back to his vagrant life.
Tom tricks him into thinking that he can later join Tom new scheme of starting robber band if he returns to the widow.
Reluctantly, Huck agrees and goes back to the widow.
The novel has elements of humour, satire and social criticism; features that later made Mark Twain one of the most important authors of American literature.
Mark Twain describes some autobiographical events in the book.
The novel is set around Twain actual boyhood home of Hannibal, near St. Louis, and many of the places in it are real and today support tourist industry as result.
To help show how mischievous and messy boyhood was, The Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Division of Art, Prints and Photographs, shows picture of young boy smoking pipe, sawing furniture, climbing all over the place, and sleeping.
In Twain novel, Tom and his friend are young when they decided they want to learn how to smoke pipe.
Tom and Joe do this to show just how cool they are to the other boys.
Tom Sawyer is Twain first attempt to write novel on his own.
He had previously written contemporary autobiographical narratives (The Innocents Abroad or The New Pilgrims' Progress, Roughing It) and two short texts called sketches which parody the youth literature of the time.
These are The Story of the Good Boy and The Story of the Wicked Little Boy which are satirical texts of few pages.
In the first, model child is never rewarded and ends up dying before he can declaim his last words which he has carefully prepared.
In the second story, an evil little boy steals and lies, like Tom Sawyer, but finishes rich and successful.
Tom appears as mixture of these little boys since he is at the same time scamp and boy endowed with certain generosity.
By the time he wrote Tom Sawyer, Twain was already successful author based on the popularity of The Innocents Abroad.
He owned large house in Hartford, Connecticut but needed another success to support himself, with wife and two daughters.
He had collaborated on novel with Charles Dudley Warner, The Gilded Age published in .
He had earlier written an unpublished memoir of his own life on the Mississippi and corresponded with boyhood friend, Will Bowen, that had evoked many memories and was used as source of material.
Twain named his fictional character after San Francisco fireman whom he met in June .
The real Tom Sawyer was local hero, famous for rescuing passengers after shipwreck.
The two remained friendly during Twain three year stay in San Francisco, often drinking and gambling together.
In November Twain gave the manuscript to Elisha Bliss of the American Publishing Company, who sent it to True Williams for the illustrations.
A little later, Twain had the text also quickly published at Chatto and Windus of London, in June but without illustration.
Pirate editions appeared very quickly in Canada and Germany.
The American Publishing Company finally published its edition in December which was the first illustrated edition of Tom Sawyer.
After completing his manuscript, Twain had copy made of it.
It is this copy which was read and annotated by his friend William Dean Howells.
Twain then made his own corrections based on Howells comments which he later incorporated in the original manuscript, but some corrections escaped him.
The English edition was based on this corrected copy, while the illustrated American edition was based on the original manuscript.
To further complicate matters, Twain was personally concerned with the revision of the proofs of the American edition, which he did not do for the English edition.
The American edition is therefore considered the authoritative edition.
A third person narrator describes the experiences of the boys, interspersed with occasional social commentary.
In its sequel, Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Mark Twain changes to first person narrative which takes moral conflicts more personally and thus makes greater social criticism possible.
The two others subsequent books, Tom Sawyer Abroad and Tom Sawyer, Detective, are similarly in the first person narrative from the perspective of Huckleberry Finn.
The book has raised controversy for its use of the racial epithet "nigger"; bowdlerized version aroused indignation among some literary critics.
The book has also gotten criticism for the caricature like portrayal of Native Americans through the character Injun Joe.
He is depicted as malevolent for the sake of malevolence, is not allowed to redeem himself in any way by Twain, dies pitiful and despairing death in cave and upon his death is treated as tourist attraction.
Revard suggests, that the adults in the novel blame the character Indian blood as the cause of his evil.
Sequels and other works featuring Tom Sawyer
Tom Sawyer, the story title character, also appears in two other uncompleted sequels: Huck and Tom Among the Indians and Tom Sawyer Conspiracy.
He is also character in Twain unfinished Schoolhouse Hill.
Tom Sawyer directed by William Desmond Taylor, starring Jack Pickford as Tom
Tom Sawyer directed by John Cromwell, starring Jackie Coogan as Tom
Tom Sawyer Soviet Union version directed by Lazar Frenkel and Gleb Zatvornitsky
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer Technicolor film by the Selznick Studio, starring Tommy Kelly as Tom and directed by Norman Taurog; most notable is the cave sequence designed by William Cameron Menzies
Tom Sawyer a musical episode of the U.S. Steel Hour, written by Frank Luther and starring John Sharpe as Tom and Jimmy Boyd as Huck.
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer BBC television series in episodes starring Fred Smith as Tom and Janina Faye as Becky.
The series' theme song was "John Gilbert is the Boat", sung by Peggy Seeger
Les aventures de Tom Sawyer Romanian/French/German television miniseries directed by Wolfgang Liebeneiner, starring Roland Demongeot as Tom and Marc Di Napoli as Huck
Aventurile lui Tom Sawyer Romanian movie directed by Mircea Albulescu.
The New Adventures of Huckleberry Finn a half hour live action/animated series produced by Hanna Barbera Productions
Las Aventuras de Juliancito Mexican film
Tom Sawyer musical adaptation by Robert B. Sherman and Richard M. Sherman, with Johnny Whitaker in the title role, Jeff East as Huck Finn, Jodie Foster as Becky Thatcher, and Celeste Holm as Aunt Polly.
Mark Twain Tom Sawyer TV movie version sponsored by Dr Pepper, starring Buddy Ebsen as Muff Potter and filmed in Upper Canada Village
Páni kluci Czech movie directed by Věra Plívová Šimková
Huckleberry Finn and His Friends TV series
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer Japanese anime television series by Nippon Animation, part of the World Masterpiece Theater, aired in the United States on HBO
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn (Приключения Тома Сойера Гекльберри Финна), Soviet Union version directed by Stanislav Govorukhin
Rascals and Robbers: The Secret Adventures of Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn a made for TV movie, starring Patrick Creadon as Tom and Anthony Michael Hall as Huck.
Tom Sawyer Canadian claymation version produced by Hal Roach studios
Tom and Huck starring Jonathan Taylor Thomas as Tom and Brad Renfro as Huck Finn.
The story takes place in contemporary time.
The Animated Adventures of Tom Sawyer Canadian version, written by Bob Merrill and directed by William R. Kowalchuk Jr.
Uses the voices of Ryan Slater, Christopher Lloyd and Kirsten Dunst.
Tom Sawyer animated adaptation featuring the characters as anthropomorphic animals instead of humans with an all star voice cast, including country singers Rhett Akins, Mark Wills, Lee Ann Womack, Waylon Jennings, and Hank Williams Jr. as well as Betty White
Thomas Sawyer, as young adult, is character in the movie League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, portrayed by Shane West.
Here, Tom is U.S. Secret Service agent who joins the team fight against Professor Moriarty.
Tom Sawyer Huckleberry Finn starring Joel Courtney as Tom and Jake T. Austin as Huck.
Band of Robbers, American crime comedy film written and directed by the Nee Brothers
In We're From Missouri, musical adaptation of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, with book, music, and lyrics by Tom Boyd, was presented by the students at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama.
In Tom Boyd musical version (re titled Tom Sawyer) was presented professionally at Theatre Royal Stratford East in London, England, and in toured provincial theatres in England.
In the play "The Boys in Autumn" was premiered in San Francisco by the American dramatist Bernhard Sabath, in which Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn meet again as old men.
Despite good reviews, the play has remained largely unknown.
In the musical The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, by Ken Ludwig and Don Schlitz, debuted on Broadway.
In the Mark Twain House and Museum selected year old Noah Altshuler (writer of Making the Move), as Mark Twain Playwright in Residence, to create modern, meta fictional adaptation of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer for regional and commercial production.
Tom Sawyer: Ballet in Three Acts premiered on October at the Kauffman Center for the Performing Arts in Kansas City, Missouri.
The score was by composer Maury Yeston, with choreography by William Whitener, artistic director of the Kansas City Ballet.
review in The New York Times observed: "It’s quite likely that this is the first all new, entirely American three act ballet: it is based on an American literary classic, has an original score by an American composer and was given its premiere by an American choreographer and company.
Both the score and the choreography are energetic, robust, warm, deliberately naïve (both ornery and innocent), in ways right for Twain.
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer has been adapted into comic book form many times:
Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn (Stoll Edwards Co., collection of the comic strip of the same name by Clare Victor Dwiggins, syndicated by the McClure Syndicate beginning in
Classics Illustrated "The Adventures of Tom Sawyer" (Gilberton, August adapted by Harry G. Miller and Aldo Rubano; reprinted extensively
Dell Junior Treasury "The Adventures of Tom Sawyer" (Dell Comics, October adapted by Frank Thorne
Joyas Literarias Juveniles "Tom Sawyer detective" (Editorial Bruguera, adapted by Miguel Cussó and Edmond Fernández Ripoll
Tom Sawyer (Pendulum Illustrated Classics, Pendulum Press, adapted by Irwin Shapiro and E. R. Cruz; reprinted in Marvel Classics Comics and number of other places
Joyas Literarias Juveniles "Las aventuras de Tom Sawyer" (Editorial Bruguera, adapted by Juan Manuel González Cremona and Xirinius
Classics Illustrated The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (First Comics, May adapted by Mike Ploog; reprinted in Classics Illustrated (NBM, )
Tom Sawyer (An All Action Classic (Sterling Publishing, adapted by Rad Sechrist
Classics Illustrated Deluxe The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (Papercutz, adapted by Jean David Morvan, Frederique Voulyze, and Severine Le Fevebvre
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (Capstone Publishers, adapted by Daniel Strickland
Manga Classics: The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (UDON Entertainment Manga Classics, April adapted by Crystal Silvermoon and Kuma Chan
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, an action platformer for the Nintendo Entertainment System.
It was released by SeTa in February in Japan and August that same year in North America.
Square Tom Sawyer, role playing video game produced by Square.
It was released in March for Japan on the Famicom.
On November to celebrate Twain’s birthday, the Google Doodle was scene from The Adventures of Tom Sawyer.
Canadian rock band Rush published song entitled "Tom Sawyer" in which is inspired by the book.
