The Jungle is novel by the American journalist and novelist Upton Sinclair (–).
Sinclair wrote the novel to portray the harsh conditions and exploited lives of immigrants in the United States in Chicago and similar industrialized cities.
His primary purpose in describing the meat industry and its working conditions was to advance socialism in the United States.
However, most readers were more concerned with several passages exposing health violations and unsanitary practices in the American meat packing industry during the early century, which greatly contributed to public outcry which led to reforms including the Meat Inspection Act.
Sinclair famously said of the public reaction, "I aimed at the public heart, and by accident hit it in the stomach."
The book depicts working class poverty, the lack of social supports, harsh and unpleasant living and working conditions, and hopelessness among many workers.
These elements are contrasted with the deeply rooted corruption of people in power.
A review by the writer Jack London called it "the Uncle Tom Cabin of wage slavery.
Sinclair was considered muckraker, or journalist who exposed corruption in government and business.
In Sinclair had spent seven weeks gathering information while working incognito in the meatpacking plants of the Chicago stockyards for the newspaper.
He first published the novel in serial form in in the Socialist newspaper Appeal to Reason, and it was published as book by Doubleday in .
The main character in the book is Jurgis Rudkus, Lithuanian immigrant trying to make ends meet in Chicago.
The book begins with his wife Ona and his wedding feast.
He and his family live near the stockyards and meatpacking district where many immigrants, who do not know much English, work.
He takes job at Brown slaughterhouse.
Jurgis had thought the US would offer more freedom, but he finds working conditions harsh.
He and his young wife struggle to survive.
They fall deeply into debt and are prey to con men.
Hoping to buy house, they exhaust their savings on the down payment for substandard slum house, which they cannot afford.
The family is eventually evicted after their money is taken.
Jurgis had expected to support his wife and other relatives, but eventually all—the women, children, and his sick father—seek work to survive.
As the novel progresses, the jobs and means the family use to stay alive slowly lead to their physical and moral decay.
Accidents at work and other events lead the family closer to catastrophe.
Jurgis' father dies as direct result of the unsafe work conditions in the meatpacking plant.
One of the children, Kristoforas, dies from food poisoning.
Jonas—the other remaining adult male aside from Jurgis—disappears and is never heard from again.
Then an injury results in Jurgis being fired from the meatpacking plant; he later takes job at Durham fertilizer plant.
The family breakdown progresses as Jurgis discovers an arrangement in which Ona has traded regular sexual favors to Phil Connor, Jurgis' boss, in exchange for being allowed to keep her job.
In revenge, Jurgis attacks Connor, resulting in his arrest and imprisonment.
After being released from jail, Jurgis finds that his family has been evicted from their house.
He finds them staying in boarding house, where Ona is in labor with her second child.
She dies in childbirth at age from blood loss; the infant also dies.
Jurgis had lacked the money for doctor.
Soon after, his first child drowns in muddy street.
Jurgis leaves the city and takes up drinking.
His brief sojourn as hobo in the rural United States shows him that no real escape is available—farmers turn their workers away when the harvest is finished.
Jurgis returns to Chicago and holds down succession of laboring jobs and as con man.
He finds out that Marija, Ona cousin, had become prostitute to support the family and is now addicted to morphine; Stanislovas, the oldest of the children at the beginning of the novel, had died after getting locked in at work and being eaten alive by rats.
One night, he wanders into lecture being given by socialist orator, where he finds community and purpose.
After fellow socialist employs him, Jurgis locates his wife family.
Jurgis then resumes his support of his wife family.
The book ends with another socialist rally, which follows some political victories.
Panorama of the beef industry in by Chicago based photographer
Men walking on wooden rails between cattle pens in the Chicago stockyard
Jurgis Rudkus, Lithuanian who immigrates to the US and struggles to support his family.
Ona Lukoszaite Rudkus, Jurgis' teenage wife.
After Ona death and Rudkus' abandonment of the family, she becomes prostitute to help feed the few surviving children.
She takes care of the children and eventually becomes beggar.
He contributes work despite his age and poor health; dies from lung infection.
Jokubas Szedvilas, Lithuanian immigrant who owns deli on Halsted Street.
Edward Marcinkus, Lithuanian immigrant and friend of the family.
Fisher, Chicago millionaire whose passion is helping poor people in slums.
Tamoszius Kuszleika, fiddler who becomes Marija fiancé.
He abandons the family in bad times and disappears.
Stanislovas Lukoszas, Elzibeta eldest son; he starts work at .
Mike Scully (originally Tom Cassidy), the Democratic Party "boss" of the stockyards.
Phil Connor, boss at the factory where Ona works.
Connor rapes Ona and forces her into prostitution.
Miss Henderson, Ona forelady at the wrapping room.
Antanas, son of Jurgis and Ona, otherwise known as "Baby".
Vilimas and Nikalojus, Elzbieta second and third sons.
Juozapas, another crippled son of Elzbieta.
Kotrina, Elzbieta daughter and Ona half sister.
Jack Duane, thief whom Rudkus meets in prison.
Madame Haupt, midwife hired to help Ona.
Freddie Jones, son of wealthy beef baron.
Buck Halloran, an Irish "political worker" who oversees vote buying operations.
Bush Harper, man who works for Mike Scully as union spy.
Tommy Hinds, the socialist owner of Hinds Hotel.
Mr. Lucas, socialist pastor and itinerant preacher.
Nicholas Schliemann, Swedish philosopher and socialist.
Durham, businessman and Jurgis’s second employer.
Part of series onSocialism inthe United States
History of the American LeftUtopian socialism
Communist Party USA and African Americans
Communism in the Labor Movement –
Communism in the Labor Movement –
Anti war and civil rights movements
Committees of Correspondence for Democracy and Socialism (CDCS)
World Socialist Party of the United States
Workers Party of the United States
Sinclair published the book in serial form between February and November in Appeal to Reason, the socialist newspaper that had supported Sinclair undercover investigation the previous year.
This investigation had inspired Sinclair to write the novel, but his efforts to publish the series as book met with resistance.
One feels that what is at the bottom of his fierceness is not nearly so much desire to help the poor as hatred of the rich.
Five publishers rejected the work as too shocking.
Sinclair was about to self publish shortened version of the novel in "Sustainer Edition" for subscribers when Doubleday, Page came on board; on February the Doubleday edition was published simultaneously with Sinclair of which appeared under the imprint of “The Jungle Publishing Company” with the Socialist Party’s symbol embossed on the cover, both using the same plates.
In the first weeks, the book sold copies.
It has been in print ever since, including four more self published editions ).
Sinclair dedicated the book "To the Workingmen of America".
The copyright (in some countries) expired after years, so there is now (as of March a free or "public domain" copy of the book available on the web site of Project Gutenberg.
In See Sharp Press published an edition based on the original serialization of The Jungle in Appeal to Reason, which they described as the "Uncensored Original Edition" as Sinclair intended it.
The foreword and introduction say that the commercial editions were censored to make their political message acceptable to capitalist publishers.
Others argue that Sinclair had made the revisions himself to make the novel more accurate and engaging for the reader, corrected the Lithuanian references, and streamlined to eliminate boring parts, as Sinclair himself said in letters and his memoir American Outpost .
Upton Sinclair intended to expose "the inferno of exploitation but the reading public fixed on food safety as the novel most pressing issue.
Sinclair admitted his celebrity arose "not because the public cared anything about the workers, but simply because the public did not want to eat tubercular beef".
Some critics have attributed this response to the characters, most of whom, including Rudkus, have unpleasant qualities.
The last section, concerning socialist rally Rudkus attended, was later disavowed by Sinclair.
But his description of the meatpacking contamination captured readers' attention.
Sinclair account of workers falling into rendering tanks and being ground along with animal parts into "Durham Pure Leaf Lard" gripped the public.
The poor working conditions, and exploitation of children and women along with men, were taken to expose the corruption in meat packing factories.
The British politician Winston Churchill praised the book in review.
In the book became target of the Nazi book burnings due to Sinclair endorsement of socialism.
President Theodore Roosevelt had described Sinclair as "crackpot" because of the writer socialist positions.
He wrote privately to journalist William Allen White, expressing doubts about the accuracy of Sinclair claims: "I have an utter contempt for him.
He is hysterical, unbalanced, and untruthful.
Three fourths of the things he said were absolute falsehoods.
For some of the remainder there was only basis of truth.
After reading The Jungle, Roosevelt agreed with some of Sinclair conclusions.
The president wrote "radical action must be taken to do away with the efforts of arrogant and selfish greed on the part of the capitalist.
He assigned the Labor Commissioner Charles P. Neill and social worker James Bronson Reynolds to go to Chicago to investigate some meat packing facilities.
Learning about the visit, owners had their workers thoroughly clean the factories prior to the inspection, but Neill and Reynolds were still revolted by the conditions.
Their oral report to Roosevelt supported much of what Sinclair portrayed in the novel, excepting the claim of workers falling into rendering vats.
Neill testified before Congress that the men had reported only "such things as showed the necessity for legislation.
That year, the Bureau of Animal Industry issued report rejecting Sinclair most severe allegations, characterizing them as "intentionally misleading and false", "willful and deliberate misrepresentations of fact", and "utter absurdity".
Roosevelt did not release the Neill–Reynolds Report for publication.
His administration submitted it directly to Congress on June .
Public pressure led to the passage of the Meat Inspection Act and the Pure Food and Drug Act; the latter established the Bureau of Chemistry (in renamed as the Food and Drug Administration).
Sinclair rejected the legislation, which he considered an unjustified boon to large meat packers.
The government (and taxpayers) would bear the costs of inspection, estimated at annually.
He complained about the public misunderstanding of the point of his book in Cosmopolitan Magazine in October by saying, "I aimed at the public heart, and by accident hit it in the stomach.
A film version of the novel was made in but it has since been lost.
Labor rights in American meatpacking industry
American socialist triptych: the literary political work of Charlotte Perkins Gilman, Upton Sinclair, and W.E.B.
Upton Sinclair", Social History (biography), archived from the original (blog) on .
Sinclair, Upton, "Note", 'The Jungle, Dover Thrift, pp.
The Fictitious Suppression of Upton Sinclair The Jungle".
The Jungle and the Progressive Era The Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History".
Upton Sinclair The Jungle, Infohouse, pp.
The Jungle: The Uncensored Original Edition.
Welcome to 'The Jungle'", Slate, July .
Arthur, Anthony Radical Innocent: Upton Sinclair, New York: Random House, pp.
Banned and/or Challenged Books from the Radcliffe Publishing Course Top Novels of the Century".
Oursler, Fulton Behold This Dreamer!, Boston: Little, Brown, p. .
The Letters, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, p. .
Jacobs, Jane, "Introduction", The Jungle, ISBN .
Hearings Before the Committee on Agriculture... on the So called "Beveridge Amendment" to the Agricultural Appropriation Bill, U.S. Congress, House, Committee on Agriculture, p. Congress, Session.
Hearings Before the Committee on Agriculture... on the So called "Beveridge Amendment" to the Agricultural Appropriation Bill, U.S. Congress, House, Committee on Agriculture, pp.
Roosevelt, Theodore Conditions in Chicago Stockyards (PDF)
Young, The Pig That Fell into the Privy, p. .
Sinclair, Upton "The Condemned Meat Industry: Reply to Mr. M. Cohn Armour", Everybody Magazine, XIV, pp.
editor, Upton Sinclair The Jungle, Infobase Publishing, p.
The Jungle at Why the reputation of Upton Sinclair good book has gone bad".
Defense of The Jungle: The Uncensored Original Edition".
The Jungle: From Lithuanian Peasant to American Socialist".
The Fictitious Suppression of Upton Sinclair The Jungle".
The Pig That Fell into the Privy: Upton Sinclair The Jungle and Meat Inspection Amendments of ".
Bulletin of the History of Medicine.
The Jungle, available at Internet Archive (scanned books first edition)
The Jungle at Project Gutenberg (plain text and HTML)
The Jungle at the Standard Ebooks site.
The Jungle public domain audiobook at LibriVox
The Jungle serialized in The Sun newspaper from the Florida Digital Newspaper Library
PBS special report marking the anniversary of the novel
Northwestern University Medill School of Journalism revisits The Jungle
vteWorks by Upton SinclairLanny Budd series
The Flivver King: Story of Ford America
The Goose step: Study of American Education
Mental Radio: Does it work, and how?
This page was last edited on May at (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike License;
By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
